1. The parents of a 4-year-old girl complain of defects on the child's upper teeth. Objectively, the vestibular surfaces of her upper incisors have defects in their pericervical areas. The defects do not cross the dentinoenamel junction and look like chalky altered enamel with visible destruction of its structure. Probing detects a rough softened surface. Cold stimuli provoke no response. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Initial inactive caries
b. Medium-depth inactive caries
c. Deep active caries
d. Initial active caries
*e. Medium-depth active caries

2. The parents of a 3-year-old girl complain of the destruction of the child's upper teeth. Objectively, there are carious cavities within mantle dentin on the masticatory surfaces of her teeth 54 and 55. Enamel and dentin are softened in the affected area and can be easily removed with an excavator. The child refuses to undergo teeth prteparation and is psychoemotionally unstable. What method of treatment should be used in this case?
a. Non-invasive sealing
b. ICON treatment
c. Remineralization therapy
d. Invasive sealing
*e. Atraumatic restorative treatment

3. What is the angle of the transverse articular path in a fixed (average) anatomical articulator?
a. 23^о
b. 110^о
c. 33^о
d. 40^о
*e. 17^o

4. A 36-year-old man complains of sharp pain in his left temporomandibular joint that radiates to his ear, headache, inability to eat, and reduced mouth opening. Objectively, his face is asymmetrical due to edema in the area of the left temporomandibular joint. The mouth opening is limited to 15-20 mm. Even minimal movements of the lower jaw cause the pain to intensify. Palpation of the joint causes intense pain. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Ankylosis of the left temporomandibular joint
b. Temporomandibular joint pain dysfunction syndrome
c. Arthrosis of the left temporomandibular joint
*d. Acute arthritis of the left temporomandibular joint
e. Chronic arthritis of the left temporomandibular joint

5. A 21-year-old man came to an orthodontist with complaints of his extremely pronounced labiomental fold. Objectively, the lower third of his face is reduced, his labiomental fold is extremely pronounced. Intraoral examination reveals the absence of contacts between the front teeth in the centric occlusion. The sagittal fissure is 4 mm. The anterobuccal cusp of the first upper molar is in contact with the same cusp of the first lower molar. What pathology can be characterized by these signs?
a. Deep bite
b. Crossbite
c. Open bite
d. Mesial occlusion
*e. Distal occlusion

6. The parents of a 10-year-old boy complain of a slight deformity in the area of the child's gonial angles and nocturnal pain attacks observed for the last several months. Examination reveals facial asymmetry caused by increased volume of the bone in the area of the gonial angles. The formations are dense, tubercular, and painless to paplation. X-ray shows uneven thinning of the cortical layer with spherical and oval areas of lucency, resembling a honeycomb and separated by dense bony septa. There is no clear border between the lesion and the healthy bone. What is the provisional diagnosis in this case?
a. Odontoma
*b. Fibrous dysplasia
c. Osteosarcoma
d. Osteoid osteoma
e. Ameloblastoma

7. A 28-year-old man came to a dentist with complaints of pain in his left lower tooth when he eats sweet foods. The pain disappears immediately after the stimulus is removed. Objectively, the masticatory surface of tooth 34 has a carious cavity with a narrow opening. The cavity is filled with soft, mildly pigmented dentin. Probing of the cavity bottom is painful. No communication with the pulp chamber could be detected. Thermal testing response is positive and brief. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
b. Medium-depth active caries lesion
*c. Deep active caries lesion
d. Acute limited pulpitis
e. Acute diffuse pulpitis

8. A 14-year-old boy has a bilateral mandibular fracture in the area of the mental foramina. Against the background of fractures, the clinic presentation of respiratory disorders intensifies. What is the cause of asphyxia in this case?
*a. Posterior displacement of the tongue root with a mandibular fragment
b. Hypersalivation
c. Edema of the oral mucosa
d. Formation of a hematoma in the floor of the mouth
e. Foreign bodies in the oral cavity

9. A 24-year-old patient has been first diagnosed with sialolithiasis, with the stone located in the duct of the submandibular salivary gland. What treatment tactics would be optimal in this case?
a. Pharmacotherapy
b. Lithotripsy
*c. Removal of the stone
d. Removal of the salivary gland
e. Marsupialization surgery

10. A 2-year-old girl is being treated for severe acute herpetic stomatitis. Currently, it is the period of disease decline. What topical medicines for the oral mucosa should be added specifically at this stage to the complex of the medicines that she takes?
a. Proteolytic enzymes
b. Antiseptics
c. Anesthetics
*d. Keratoplastics
e. Antivirals

11. A 52-year-old woman complains of aesthetic defects in her teeth that she noticed several years ago. Objectively, on the vestibular surfaces of her premolars and incisors, in their pericervical areas, there are fissure-like defects within the mantle dentine, formed by smooth glossy surfaces. The necks of the teeth are exposed. The gums are firm and pale pink. The defects are painless when probed. Make the diagnosis.
a. Necrosis of dental hard tissues
b. Erosion of dental hard tissues
c. Pathological tooth wear
*d. Cuneiform defect
e. Medium-depth inactive carious lesion

12. In a 16-year-old girl, a dentist has detected patches of white enamel that has lost its natural luster in the pericervical regions of her teeth 11 and 21. The enamel surface is smooth and dense to probing. Thermal stimulation results are negative. The lesions stain with a 2% aqueous solution of methylene blue. In this case, the infiltration technique was chosen for the treatment of the initial caries. What material is used in this technique?
*a. ICON
b. Glass ionomer cement
c. Dental compomer
d. Calcium hydroxide-containing paste
e. Silver nitrate solution

13. After complex examination of a 44-year-old man, the dentist diagnosed him with generalized parodontitis, II degree, exacerbated course. According to the patient's medical history, lately the patient has been noticing deterioration of his general condition, thirst, dry mouth, and itching skin. What additional test should the patient undergo first in this case?
a. Immunological blood test
b. Blood iron levels
c. Complete comprehensive blood count
*d. Blood sugar levels
e. Vitamin C levels in the blood

14. A 45-year-old man came to a dentist to have a denture made for him. Objectively, his teeth 46, 47, 48 are missing. The edentulous part of the alveolar process is significantly atrophied. The antagonist teeth are intact, with well-defined cusps. A decision has been made to make him porcelain-fused-to-metal crowns supported by intraosseous implants. What can prevent occlusal overload of implants?
a. Deepening the fissures on the crowns
b. Removing the crowns from the occlusion
*c. Reducing the width of the crowns
d. Reducing the height of the crowns
e. Reducing the height of the cusps of antagonist teeth

15. A patient has been diagnosed with a unilateral linear fracture in the area of the gonial angle. Immobilization was carried out by applying a two-jaw dental wire splint with hook loops and an interjaw elastic band. The fracture is healing without complications. How much time must pass before the splint could be removed?
*a. 3 weeks
b. 1 month
c. 10 days
d. 2 weeks
e. 7 days

16. A 55-year-old man came to a dentist with complaints of increased tooth sensitivity when eating sour, cold, or hard foods. Objectively, the height of the tooth crowns is reduced by 1/3. The occlusal surfaces of the teeth are flat, with exposed dense glossy dentin and sharp edges of the enamel. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Erosion of dental hard tissues
b. Cuneiform defects
c. Systemic enamel hypoplasia
d. Hyperesthesia
*e. Pathological tooth wear

17. Removable complete dentures are being made for the both jaws of a 68-year-old woman. Objectively, her alveolar processes are slightly atrophied, the mucosa is moderately pliant. Anatomical impressions have been obtained. What is the next stage of the denture-making in this case?
a. Measuring the centric relation of the jaws
b. Checking the denture construction
c. Obtaining the functional impressions
*d. Making the individual impression trays
e. Making the wax bases with the bite rims

18. A girl born with a partially cleft palate needs an obturator. What is the optimal age for installing a palatal obturator in this case?
a. 5-6 years
*b. First several days after birth
c. 3-4 years
d. 2 years
e. 1 year

19. Complete removable dentures are being made for the upper and lower jaw of a 75-year-old man. At the stage of checking the wax cast of the denture with the artificial teeth in the oral cavity, a contact between the lateral teeth is observed, while there is no contact between the front teeth. What mistake has been made in this case?
a. Mistake during the teeth placement
*b. Fixation of anterior occlusion
c. No contact between the bite rims in the lateral regions
d. No contact between the bite rims in the frontal region
e. Deformation of the working cast

20. Extraction of tooth 36 is indicated for a 39-year-old woman because of destruction of its bifurcation. The crown part of the tooth was removed together with its mesial root. The distal root of tooth 36 is destroyed below the gum level. What instrument should be used to remove the distal root of tooth 36?
*a. Angle elevator right (outward facing)
b. Converging beak-shaped forceps
c. Angle elevator left (inward facing)
d. Bayonet root forceps
e. Straight elevator

21. A 45-year-old woman complains of frequent repeated dislocations of the temporomandibular joint. Objectively, her second and third molars are missing on both jaws. A habitual dislocation of the temporomandibular joint has been diagnosed. What would be the optimal method of treatment for this patient?
a. Complete immobilization of the mandible
b. Massage
c. Myogymnastics
*d. Reducing mouth opening
e. Physiotherapy

22. A patient came to a dental surgeon for a tooth extraction. To perform this procedure, the doctor chose S-shaped forceps without spikes. What tooth will be extracted by the doctor?
a. 26
b. 17
*c. 14
d. 34
e. 41

23. A 34-year-old woman brought to a dentist her 3-month-old son. The boy weighs 3400 g (2850 g at birth) and has congenital complete non-union of the upper lip. The integrity of the alveolar process and palate are preserved. The child was born from the second pregnancy. The labor was prolonged, requiring the use of obstetric forceps. The father's family has history of similar defects. What is the most likely cause of the boy being born with defects?
a. Mother's age
b. Trauma during childbirth
*c. Heredity
d. Second pregnancy
e. Hypotrophy of the newborn

24. A 32-year-old man complains of pain and heaviness in the right half of his face, nasal congestion, thick discharge from the right half of his nose, pain in his right upper teeth, and fever of 38^оС. Objectively, the anterior surface of his right upper jaw is edematous and painful to palpation. In the oral cavity, tooth 15 is destroyed, its percussion is painful. X-ray shows an area of bone tissue destruction with unclear contours near the root apex of tooth 15 and darkening of the right maxillary sinus. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Acute rhinogenic maxillary sinusitis
*b. Acute purulent odontogenic maxillary sinusitis
c. Acute purulent maxillary periostitis
d. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
e. Chronic granulating periodontitis

25. The parents of a 5-year-old girl complain that their child developed acute fever of 39^оC, weakness, sore throat, and rash on the body. The child refuses to eat. Objectively, her oral mucosa is dry, the tongue is bright red and has edematous papillae, the mucosa of the tonsils, palatal arches, and soft palate is sharply hyperemic. Submandibular lymphadenitis is observed. Bright red, fine rashes that in some places merge together are observed on the skin of the child's face and neck, except the nasolabial triangle. Make the provisional diagnosis.
a. Infectious mononucleosis
*b. Scarlet fever
c. Acute pseudomembranous candidiasis
d. Measles
e. Diphtheria

26. A 6-year-old girl is being treated for acute diffuse pulpitis of tooth 85 using the technique of vital pulp extirpation. What type of material would be optimal in this case for permanent obturation of the root canals?
a. Calcium hydroxide-based pastes
b. Zinc phosphate cements
c. Glass ionomer cements
*d. Zinc eugenol pastes
e. Epoxy resin-based pastes with gutta-percha pins

27. It is planned to make removable implant-supported dentures for the both jaws of a 55-year-old patient. The decision is being made regarding the type of implantation, the required number of implants, and their location. What additional examination method will be most useful in making the optimal decision?
*a. Computed tomography
b. Targeted X-ray
c. Ultrasonic densitometry
d. Analysis of diagnostic casts
e. Occlusiography

28. When examining a 10-year-old boy, the dentist noticed that the boy's central lower incisors were rotated around their axis. What anomaly is it?
a. Supraocclusion
b. Retention
c. Infraocclusion
*d. Tortoocclusion
e. Transposition

29. In a 3-year-old girl, a dentist has detected a carious cavity on the masticatory surface of tooth 74 within the mantle dentin. The overhanging edges of the enamel are matte white. The dentin in the carious cavity is light-colored, soft, and can be removed in layers. Probing of the dentinoenamel junction is tender. Cold stimulus provokes pain that quickly stops after the stimulus is removed. What material should be used for the filling of the carious cavity in this case?
*a. Glass ionomer cement
b. ICON
c. Zinc phosphate cement
d. Composite filling material
e. Amalgam

30. A 39-year-old woman complains of feeling generally unwell, headache, fever of 38^oC, and pain in her oral cavity. She periodically develops similar health conditions, more often in autumn and in spring. Objectively, she has erythematous spots, burst vesicles, and erosions with a fibrinous coating on the acutely hyperemic and edematous mucosa of her cheeks, lips, and soft palate. Nikolsky sign is negative. Hypersalivation is observed. The submandibular lymph nodes are enlarged, mobile, and mildly painful during palpation. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
*a. Erythema multiforme exudativum
b. Chronic recurrent herpes
c. Chronic recurrent aphthous stomatitis
d. Lichen ruber planus, erosive-ulcerative form
e. Pemphigus vulgaris

31. A young man was hospitalized after a traffic accident with a soft tissue injury to the right parotid masseteric region. The patient cannot close his right eye, the right corner of his mouth is drooping. What anatomical structure has been damaged in this case, causing these symptoms?
a. Parenchyma of the parotid gland
b. Capsule of the parotid gland
*c. Facial nerve
d. Mimetic muscles
e. Excretory duct of the parotid gland

32. A 24-year-old pregnant woman came to a dentist with complaints of acute pain in the area of her tooth 38. Her term of pregnancy is 22 weeks. She has no history of allergies. Objectively, the crown of tooth 38 is destroyed by 2/3, percussion is sharply painful. Tooth extraction is indicated. What anesthetic is the drug of choice for pregnant patients?
a. Lidocaine
b. Bupivacaine
c. Novocaine (Procaine)
*d. Articaine
e. Mepivacaine

33. A 49-year-old man came to a dentist with complaints of spontaneous, paroxysmal, radiating pain in his right lower jaw, observed periodically over the past year. The pain attacks last 20-30 minutes and are spontaneous, sometimes occurring when the patient tilts his head. Objectively, generalized pathological tooth wear of the I-II degree is observed. The masticatory surface of tooth 46 has a large composite filling. X-ray shows a dense formation 3 mm in size in the pulp chamber of tooth 46. Percussion and thermal testing are mildly positive. Electric pulp testing - 35 microamperes. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
b. Chronic deep caries
c. Acute limited pulpitis
d. Neuralgia of the third branch of the trigeminal nerve
*e. Chronic concremental pulpitis

34. A 50-year-old man complains of a neoplasm in his frontal region on the left. The neoplasm appeared 2 months ago and is slowly growing. It is dense, elastic, round, mobile, and painless. The skin over the neoplasm is not discolored. Its surface has a punctate indentation that produces whitish foul-smelling masses. Make the provisional diagnosis.
a. Fibroma
b. Exophytic skin cancer
c. Keratoacanthoma
d. Lipoma
*e. Atheroma

35. During preventive examination of a 13-year-old boy, the dentist detected congestive hyperemia of the gingival margin in the frontal area of his upper and lower jaw. His gums bleed when he brushes his teeth. The patient's decay-missing-filled (DMF) index is 1. For personal oral hygiene, this patient should be recommended the toothpastes that contain the following:
a. Sodium fluoride
b. Salts
c. Aminofluorides
d. Calcium compounds
*e. Herbal extracts

36. A 42-year-old man complains of sharp pain and clicking in his right temporomandibular joint and burning pain in the area of his right external auditory canal. The patient has recent history of acute stress. Objectively, his face is symmetrical, the bite is orthognathic. When the patient opens his mouth, his lower jaw makes zeta-like movements with brief moments of joint blockage and pain. Intraoral palpation of the lateral pterygoid muscles causes the patient to feel pain on the right. Tomography detects no pathological changes in the contours of the bone structures of the articular surfaces. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Deforming arthrosis of the temporomandibular joint
*b. Neuromuscular temporomandibular syndrome
c. Rheumatoid arthritis of the temporomandibular joint
d. Acute post-traumatic arthritis of the temporomandibular joint
e. Fibrous ankylosis of the temporomandibular joint

37. A patient with a gunshot wound to the face and laceration of the palatal and pharyngeal tissues develops increasing respiratory failure. The flap that hangs from the wound sometimes partially and sometimes completely closes the entrance to the larynx during breathing. What type of asphyxia can be expected to develop in this case?
*a. Valve asphyxia
b. Stenotic asphyxia
c. Aspiration asphyxia
d. Dislocation asphyxia
e. Obstructive asphyxia

38. During examination of a 14-year-old girl, the dentist detected a deep carious cavity on the masticatory surface of her tooth 16. The cavity communicates with the pulp chamber. Probing of the communication area and tooth percussion are painless. Thermal stimuli provoke no response. The gingival mucosa in the area of tooth 16 is unchanged. X-ray of tooth 16 shows deformation of the periodontal gap in the form of its uneven expansion. What would be the optimal material for permanent obturation of the root canals of tooth 16?
a. Mineral trioxide aggregate material
*b. Gutta-percha with a sealer
c. Calcium hydroxide paste
d. Zinc oxide-eugenol paste
e. Phenol-based material

39. A 37-year-old man complains of a whitish spot on the vermilion border of his lower lip. Objectively, against the background of visually unchanged vermilion border of the lower lip in the middle between the lip midline and the angle of the mouth, there is a grayish-white irregular (polygonal) lesion 7x4 mm in size. The lesion is slightly concave and covered in small scales tightly attached to its surface. Palpation detects no induration of the lesion base, though lateral palpation of the lesion detects a superficial induration. Regional lymph nodes remain unchanged. What is the provisional diagnosis in this case?
a. Manganotti abrasive precancerous cheilitis
b. Flat leukoplakia
c. Cancer of the lower lip
*d. Limited precancerous hyperkeratosis
e. Lichen ruber planus

40. A 42-year-old man complains of periodic pain in the area of his tooth 48. Objectively, his tooth 48 has partially erupted with its distal cusps, the mucosa is pale pink and painless to palpation, the mouth opening is unrestricted. X-ray shows tooth 48 to be medially oblique to tooth 47. What surgical treatment method would be optimal in this case?
a. Operculum removal
b. Typical extraction of tooth 48
*c. Atypical extraction of tooth 48
d. Bicuspidization
e. Operculum dissection

41. Langhans cells were detected in the puncture material obtained from the cervical lymph nodes of a 10-year-old boy. What diagnosis can be confirmed by the cellular composition of the puncture material?
a. Syphilis
b. Chronic nonspecific lymphadenitis
c. Lymphogranulomatosis
*d. Tuberculous lymphadenitis
e. Actinomycosis

42. During tooth extraction, a 43-year-old man developed sharp headache, dizziness, nausea, visual snow, and heat and tremor throughout his body. Objectively, the patient is agitated and presents with edema of the skin of his neck and face, tachycardia, and blood pressure of 190/110 mm Hg. What emergency condition has likely developed in the patient?
a. Angina pectoris attack
b. Acute cerebrovascular accident
c. Myocardial infarction
d. Anaphylactic shock
*e. Hypertensive crisis

43. A 27-year-old man came to a dentist with complaints of a change in the position of his tooth 32 after an injury and pain that intensifies when he bites off pieces of food. Objectively, the following is observed: edema of the lower lip, hematoma of the mucosa in the area of tooth 32, tooth mobility of the first degree, and its slight displacement in the sagittal direction. X-ray shows widening of the periodontal gap in tooth 32. Make the diagnosis.
a. Fracture of the root of tooth 32
b. Contusion of tooth 32
*c. Incomplete dislocation of tooth 32
d. Complete dislocation of tooth 32
e. Impacted dislocation of tooth 32

44. After examination, a 34-year-old patient was diagnosed with Melkersson-Rosenthal syndrome. What complex of symptoms is characteristic of this syndrome?
*a. Macrocheilitis, fissured tongue, paresis of the facial nerve
b. Fissured tongue, atopic cheilitis, trigeminal neuritis
c. Lichen ruber planus, essential hypertension, diabetes mellitus
d. Median rhomboid glossitis, eczematous cheilitis, paresis of the facial nerve
e. Hutchinson's teeth, congenital deafness, congenital blindness

45. A 20-year-old young man came to a dentist with complaints of an aesthetic defect in his upper front tooth. Examination detects a chalk-like spot on the vestibular surface of his tooth 22. What additional examination would be the most informative in this case for differential diagnosis and diagnosis-making?
a. Luminescence diagnostics
*b. Staining with a 2% methylene blue solution
c. Cold stimulus
d. X-ray
e. Electric pulp testing

46. A 69-year-old woman complains of dry mouth and burning pain in her oral cavity, observed over the past several weeks. For the last 2 years she has been using removable laminar dentures. Objectively, the mucosa of the hard palate and tongue dorsum is bright red, hyperemic, and edematous. Within the prosthetic bed there is a small amount of easily removable gray-white plaque. The patient has cracks in the corners of her mouth. What medicines are used for the etiotropic treatment of this disease?
*a. Antifungals
b. Antihistamines
c. Antivirals
d. Antiprotozoal agents
e. Antibiotics

47. During endodontic treatment of tooth 26 for chronic granulating periodontitis, the dentist irrigated the root canals with an antiseptic that can penetrate into biofilm structures, destroy them, and cause dissolution of organic tissues. What antiseptic was used by the doctor in this case?
a. Hydrogen peroxide solution
b. Chlorhexidine solution
*c. Sodium hypochlorite solution
d. Furacilin (Nitrofurazone) solution
e. Saline solution

48. A 14-year-old girl came to a dentist with complaints of enlarged gingival papillae in the area of her upper and lower front teeth. Examination reveals that the gingival papillae on the upper and lower jaw are hyperemic and edematous. They bleed when touched and overlap the crowns of the teeth to 1/2 of their height. The most important role in the etiology of this disease is often played by changes in a certain system of the human body. Name this system.
a. Immune system
b. Cardiovascular system
c. Central nervous system
*d. Endocrine system
e. Digestive system

49. A dentist performs endodontic treatment of tooth 46 for chronic fibrous pulpitis. The dentist chose the step-back technique to scout and widen the root canals. At the first stage, the root canal was scouted and its working length was determined. What is the next step according to this technique?
a. Smoothing the walls of the root canal
*b. Formation of the apical stop
c. Formation of the upper third of the root canal
d. Exposing the apical opening
e. Formation of the middle third of the root canal

50. A 44-year-old man came to a dental surgeon for installation of dental implants. A two-stage implantation is planned in the area of his ??missing teeth 15, 16, and 17. What is the minimum time required for complete osseointegration of implants in the upper jaw?
*a. 6 months
b. 12 months
c. 3 months
d. 9 months
e. 2 months

51. A 47-year-old man came to a dentist with complaints of feeling generally unwell, reduced mouth opening, and pain in the throat on the left. The pain intensifies during talking and swallowing. Objectively, the face is symmetrical, the mouth opening is severely reduced, the patient cannot shift his jaw to the right. The mucosa in the area of the left pterygomandibular fold is hyperemic and painful. A painful infiltrate is palpable on the inner surface of the left gonial angle. What diagnosis can be suspected in this case?
a. Acute purulent pericoronitis in the area of tooth 38
b. Peritonsillar abscess
c. Phlegmon of the left parapharyngeal space
*d. Phlegmon of the left pterygomandibular space
e. Abscess of the retromylohyoid fossa

52. A partial removable laminar denture is being made for a 57-year-old patient with missing upper lateral teeth. The patient has the orthognathic type of occlusion. How much should the denture base overlap the crowns of the front teeth on the palatal side?
*a. 1/3 of the height of the crowns
b. The entire height of the crowns
c. Reaching the level of the necks of the teeth
d. 2/3 of the height of the crowns
e. 1/2 the height of the crowns

53. The parents of a 5-month-old boy brought him to a dentist complaining that their child frequently cries, refuses to eat, has fever of 37.3^оС and his gums became red. Examination detects bright-colored hyperemic and edematous gums with cyanotic spots on the front lower jaw. What is the most likely cause of the gingival inflammation in this case?
a. Infectious mononucleosis
b. Acute candidiasis
c. Scarlet fever
*d. Tooth eruption
e. Herpetic infection

54. A 45-year-old woman needs dentures for her missing teeth 24 and 25. X-ray shows a small patch of bone tissue destruction with clear contours in the apical area of the root of tooth 23. The root canal of tooth 23 is filled with a non-homogeneous filling material to the 2/3 of its length. There is a permanent composite filling without defects. Percussion of the tooth is painless, the alveolar mucosa in this area is of normal color. What would be the dentist's tactics regarding tooth 23?
a. Repeat X-ray in 6 months
b. Extract the tooth
c. Perform resection of the root apex
*d. Repeat endodontic treatment
e. Conduct a course of physiotherapy

55. A 13-year-old boy undergoes the treatment of acute deep caries of his tooth 25. At the preparation stage, the dentist accidentally perforated the pulp chamber in the projection of the pulp horn. What should be the dentist's tactics in this case?
a. Apply a devitalizing paste
*b. Apply an MTA group material
c. Perform vital extirpation of the pulp
d. Fill the carious cavity with glass ionomer cement
e. Perform diathermocoagulation of the pulp

56. A patient is scheduled for orthopedic treatment due to the partial absence of his upper and lower teeth. What is used to transfer the data about the position of the upper jaw relative to the temporomandibular joint axis into the articulator?
a. Bite rims
b. Parallelometer
*c. Facebow
d. Auxiliary impressions
e. Occluder

57. A 53-year-old woman complains of excessive tooth wear on her lower jaw, creaking in her temporomandibular joint, and changed facial features. Objectively, the height of the lower third of her face is reduced, the nasolabial folds are markedly visible, the corners of the mouth are lowered. Teeth 48, 47, 46, 36, 37, 38 are missing. The remaining lower teeth are worn down to the gum. The interalveolar height is 8 mm. How to correctly achieve the restructuring of the myotatic reflexes and the required bite height?
a. Immediately, using dentures
b. "Impacting" the upper teeth
c. Surgically
*d. Step by step, using dentontogingival mouthguards
e. Immediately, using dental mouthguards

58. When examining a 58-year-old patient, the dentist detects deformity and decreased size of his tongue that is dense and bluish-red. Gummatous infiltration is observed on the palatine mucosa. Make the provisional diagnosis.
a. Fissured tongue
b. Desquamative glossitis
*c. Tertiary syphilis
d. Median rhomboid glossitis
e. Congenital anomaly of the tongue

59. A 15-year-old girl has been provisionally diagnosed with localized parodontitis by the dentist. What instrument should be used to measure the depth of the periodontal pockets?
a. Periodontal knife
b. Button probe
c. Gracey curette
d. Endodontic ruler
*e. Periodontal probe

60. A 62-year-old woman complains of intense pain attacks in the area of her left lower jaw that last 1-3 minutes. The pain occurs during talking, washing her face, and touching the skin. Mandibular X-ray detects no pathological changes in the bone tissue. Make the provisional diagnosis.
a. Pterygopalatine ganglionitis
*b. Neuralgia of the third branch of the trigeminal nerve
c. Neuralgia of the second branch of the trigeminal nerve
d. Neuritis of the third branch of the trigeminal nerve
e. Facial nerve neuritis

61. A 7-year-old boy is indicated mandibular vestibuloplasty. What pathology is most often caused by a shallow vestibule of the oral cavity?
a. Deep bite
b. Crowded front teeth
c. Jaw growth retardation
*d. Periodontal diseases
e. Parafunction of facial muscles

62. An 8-year-old boy hit his chin at home 4 days ago. After the injury, swelling appeared in the injured area. Two days later, the pain intensified and the child's body temperature increased. Objectively, there is significant tissue edema in the submental region, the skin is hyperemic and cyanotic over the edema. Palpation detects there a painful dense infiltrate with a softened area. The bite is not impaired, the mouth opening is not reduced. The body temperature is 37.5^оC. Make the provisional diagnosis.
a. Submental hematoma
b. Mandibular fracture
c. Inflammatory infiltrate of the submental tissues
d. Post-traumatic edema of the submental tissues
*e. Suppurated submental hematoma

63. A patient has been provisionally diagnosed with recurrent herpetic stomatitis. This diagnosis can be confirmed if certain cells are detected by the cytology test. Name these cells.
a. Niemann-Pick cells
b. Gaucher cells
c. Tzanck cells
*d. Multinucleated giant cell
e. Atypical mononuclear cells

64. A 29-year-old man complains of pain in the oral cavity, inability to eat, and fever of 38^оС. According to the patient's medical history, several days ago he had acute food poisoning. Objectively, his complexion is pale, hypersalivation is observed, there are sharply painful ulcers with a dirty-gray coating on the mucosa of the lips, cheeks, gums, and the floor of the mouth. Regional lymph nodes are enlarged and painful to palpation. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
*a. Vincent's necrotizing ulcerative stomatitis
b. Miliary ulcerative tuberculosis
c. Acantholytic pemphigus
d. Erythema multiforme exudativum
e. Sutton's stomatitis

65. A 30-year-old woman came to a dentist with complaints of a cavity in her upper right tooth. Examination detects a carious cavity with a wide opening within the peripulpal dentin on the masticatory surface of tooth 16. The carious cavity does not communicate with the pulp chamber and is filled with dense pigmented dentin. Probing of its bottom and walls, thermal testing, and percussion are painless. Electric pulp testing - 12 microamperes. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
*a. Deep inactive lesion
b. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis
c. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
d. Medium-depth inactive lesion
e. Chronic fibrous pulpitis

66. A 30-year-old man came to a dentist with complaints of a swelling on his upper lip. According to the patient's history, over the last three days he felt intense pain in his upper front tooth. The pain intensifies when he bites on the tooth. Objectively, the patient presents with facial asymmetry due to upper lip edema, his nasolabial fold on the left is smoothed. In the oral cavity, the mucogingival fold at the level of teeth 11, 21, and 22 is edematous, hyperemic, and painful to palpation. X-ray shows signs of bone tissue destruction in the area of the root apex of tooth 21. The bone lesion is 3-4 mm in diameter. The root canal of tooth 21 is filled to 2/3 of its length. The patient has been diagnosed with acute purulent periostitis of the upper jaw, originating from tooth 21. What treatment tactics would be optimal in this case?
a. Extraction of teeth 11, 21, and 22, periosteotomy, anti-inflammatory therapy
b. Extraction of tooth 21, periosteotomy, anti-inflammatory therapy
c. Extraction of tooth 21, periosteotomy
d. Repeated endodontic treatment of tooth 21, anti-inflammatory therapy
*e. Repeated endodontic treatment of tooth 21, periosteotomy, anti-inflammatory therapy

67. A 7-year-old boy has been diagnosed with exacerbation of chronic granulating periodontitis of tooth 75, with 3/4 of the crown of tooth 75 destroyed. During examination, the child was calm and answered the doctor's questions. The boy is somatically healthy. What method of anesthesia should be used for the tooth extraction in this case?
a. Mask anesthesia
*b. Conduction anesthesia
c. Intravenous anesthesia
d. Infiltration anesthesia
e. Topical anesthesia

68. What are diamond dental burs with red markings used for in dentistry?
a. Opening carious cavities
b. Quick removal of dental tissues
c. Finishing composite fillings
d. Universal application
*e. Preliminary polishing of composite fillings

69. A 14-year-old girl came to a dentist with complaints of intense long-term pain in the area of her upper left tooth. She has been diagnosed with acute diffuse pulpitis of tooth 26. What treatment method would be optimal in this case?
a. Biological method
b. Devital pulpotomy
c. Devital pulpectomy
*d. Vital pulpectomy
e. Vital pulpotomy

70. A 13-year-old girl complains of edematous gums that bleed when she brushes her teeth. This condition has been observed for the last half a year. Objectively, her gingival mucosa in the area of the upper front teeth is edematous and cyanotic. The interdental papillae are round, doughy, enlarged, and overlap the crowns to 1/3 of their height. Teeth 13 and 23 are positioned vestibularly. Make the provisional diagnosis.
*a. Chronic hypertrophic gingivitis
b. Acute catarrhal gingivitis
c. Localized parodontitis, I degree
d. Generalized parodontitis, I degree
e. Chronic catarrhal gingivitis

71. A 12-year-old girl complains of fever of 38.2^оC, pain in her mouth during eating, bleeding gums, and bad breath. The symptoms appeared three days ago. Objectively, the gingival margin on her upper and lower jaw is edematous, hyperemic, and sharply painful. It is covered in a dirty-gray coating, bleeds easily when touched, and has erosions in some places. What group of drugs should be used first for the local treatment of this disease?
a. Anti-inflammatory agents
*b. Anesthetics
c. Keratoplastics
d. Enzymes
e. Antiseptics

72. A 14-year-old boy received a burn injury on his face when conducting experiments during a chemistry class. Objectively, the skin at the site of the damage is dehydrated and covered with a dense dry scab with clear boundaries and a band of hyperemia on the periphery. The scab is embedded into the skin. What type of traumatic agent is most likely in this case?
a. Radiation
b. Salt
c. Thermal
d. Alkaline
*e. Acidic

73. A clasp (bugel) denture with clammer fixation is being made for a partially edentulous patient with missing upper teeth (Kennedy class I). Impressions were obtained, casts were made, and the centric relation of the jaws was determined and fixed. What laboratory stage of the denture-making is the next one?
a. Installation of the gating system
b. Obtaining a refractory cast
c. Duplication of the cast
d. Marking the denture frame
*e. Studying the working cast in a parallelometer

74. A complete removable laminar denture for the lower jaw is indicated for an 82-year-old man. Mild atrophy of the alveolar process is observed. At the stage of fitting a custom tray using the Herbst method, it falls off when the tip of the tongue touches the left cheek with the mouth half closed. Name the area where the edge of the tray should be shortened.
a. From canine to canine on the vestibular side
*b. At the distance of 1 cm from the midline on the sublingual edge of the tray on the right
c. At the distance of 1 cm from the midline on the sublingual edge of the tray on the left
d. Near the lingual frenulum
e. Along the mylohyoid line on the left

75. A 28-year-old woman complains of a cavity in her lower left tooth. Objectively, a mesio-occlusal distal (MOD) defect of hard tissues is observed in tooth 36, the tooth is vital. X-ray detects no changes in the periapical tissues of tooth 36. The anatomical and functional integrity of the tooth is being restored by making an inlay using an indirect method. During the first visit, the doctor prepared the dental cavity. What stage of denture-making is next?
a. Inlay modeling
b. Inlay fixation
c. Inlay casting
*d. Obtaining an impression
e. Model casting

76. A 12-year-old girl has been hospitalized due to the injury sustained during a fall from a height. After examination, she was diagnosed with a contused-lacerated cheek wound, a closed cerebrocranial injury, and a concussion. What type of injury is it?
a. Combined
*b. Associated
c. Single
d. Multiple
e. Isolated

77. A 44-year-old man came to a dentist for oral cavity sanation. Examination reveals that the crown of his tooth 17 is completely destroyed. After undergoing additional examination, the patient was diagnosed with chronic granulating periodontitis of tooth 17. Tooth extraction is indicated. What type of conduction anesthesia should be used in this case?
a. Plexual
b. Incisor and infraorbital
c. Torusal
*d. Tuberal and palatine
e. Infraorbital and palatine

78. A 62-year-old man came to a dentist for the planned extraction of tooth 48. During examination the patient suddenly fell unconscious. Objectively, his respiration and pulse were slow, the head was bowed, the elbows and wrists were flexed, the legs were stretched out, the jaws were clenched. After that the patient developed clonic seizures and foamy saliva. The pupils were dilated and unresponsive to light. When 1.5 minutes have passed since the onset of the seizure, the patient's muscles relaxed. His consciousness is clouded. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Hypertensive crisis
b. Acute cerebrovascular accident
c. Syncope
*d. Epileptic seizure
e. Paroxysmal tachycardia attack

79. A 36-year-old woman complains of burning, painful, and bleeding gums. Objectively, the gums of her upper and lower jaw are edematous, brightly hyperemic, and bleed when probed. Periodontal pockets are up to 4 mm deep and contain seropurulent exudate. The teeth have pathological mobility of the first degree. X-ray shows uneven resorption of the interalveolar septa to 1/2 of their height with diffuse osteoporosis of the spongy (cancellous) bone tissue. What are the degree and course of generalized parodontitis in this patient?
a. I degree, exacerbated course
b. III degree, chronic course
c. II degree, chronic course
d. I degree, chronic course
*e. II degree, exacerbated course

80. A 55-year-old woman came to a dentist with complaints of a coarse feeling in her mouth, an unusual appearance of her buccal mucosa, and burning pain in her mouth when she eats irritating foods. The patient has history of chronic cholecystitis. Objectively, there are artificial crowns made of various metals in her oral cavity. Against the background of the unchanged buccal mucosa, there are rash patches consisting of small whitish keratinized papules in the retromolar space. The papules slightly rise above the mucosa, form a ring-shaped pattern, and cannot be scraped off. Make the provisional diagnosis.
a. Secondary syphilis
*b. Lichen ruber planus
c. Lupus erythematosus
d. Acute pseudomembranous candidiasis
e. Verrucous leukoplakia

81. Examination of a 12-year-old girl by a dentist reveals a carious cavity on the mesial contact surface of tooth 46. The cavity is located within the mantle dentin, its walls and bottom are pigmented and dense. Thermal stimuli provoke no response. Preparation of tooth 46 is painful in the area of the dentinoenamel junction. The decay-missing-filled index is DFM+df=2. What filling material would be optimal in this case?
a. Amalgam
b. Silicophosphate cement
*c. Photopolymer composite
d. Zinc phosphate cement
e. Glass-ionomer cement

82. A dentist has diagnosed a 20-year-old patient with initial active caries of tooth 22. A course of remineralization therapy is planned. What preparations are used most often in this treatment method?
a. Magnesium and potassium
b. Chlorine and sodium
c. Fluorine and strontium
d. Potassium and phosphorus
*e. Calcium and fluorine

83. A newborn girl has been diagnosed with congenital unilateral complete non-union of the upper lip with deformation of the cutaneo-cartilaginous portion of the nose. What age would be optimal for undergoing the surgical treatment in this case?
a. 18 months
b. 12 months
c. First 10 days of life
d. 24 months
*e. 6 months

84. A clasp (bugel) denture is being made by a dentist for a 58-year-old patient with a defect of the lower dentition. When planning the design of the clasps (clammers), their rigid elements were placed in the zone between the occlusal surface and the boundary (survey) line of the abutment tooth. In what zone should the supporting part of the supporting and retaining clasp be located?
*a. Occlusal zone
b. Retaining zone
c. Neutral zone
d. Gingival zone
e. Seal zone

85. A patient is undergoing endodontic treatment of tooth 11 due to exacerbation of chronic pulpitis. The dentist has performed instrumental treatment and pharmacotherapy of the root canal and plans to use warm vertical condensation of gutta-percha to fill the canal. What instrument should be used for condensing the filler?
a. K-file
*b. Plugger
c. Root needle
d. Gutta-condenser
e. Spreader

86. A 28-year-old woman came to a dentist with complaints of a swelling that she discovered accidentally in the area of her maxillary alveolar process on the left. Her mouth opening is unhindered. Objectively, in the area of the maxillary alveolar process on the left, in the projection of the roots of teeth 22 and 23, there is a deformity that looks like a round induration and is painless to palpation. Teeth 22, 23, 24 are intact. X-ray shows an area of bone tissue rarefaction with clear boundaries, up to 1 cm in diameter, located between the roots of teeth 22 and 23. Their periodontal gap is preserved, the roots are divergent. Electric pulp testing results are within the normal range. Make the provisional diagnosis.
a. Follicular cyst
b. Ameloblastoma
*c. Globulomaxillary cyst
d. Nasopalatine cyst
e. Cementoma

87. A 47-year-old man came to a dentist with complaints of a painless tumor-like growth on his lower lip that appeared one month ago. Objectively, against the background of visually unchanged vermilion border of the lower lip, there is a formation 6 mm in diameter and 3 mm in height with a lumpy bluish-red surface, covered in small grayish scales. The formation is moderately dense and painless to palpation. It has no infiltrate in its base or on the periphery. Regional lymph nodes are not palpable. What is the provisional diagnosis in this case?
*a. Verrucous precancer of the vermilion border
b. Cancer of the lower lip
c. Limited precancerous hyperkeratosis
d. Pyogenic granuloma
e. Keratoacanthoma

88. Extraction of the deciduous lower central incisors is indicated for a 6-year-old girl due to a change in her occlusion. The teeth exhibit third-degree mobility. What local anesthesia would be optimal in this case?
a. Inhalational anesthesia
b. Intraosseous anesthesia
c. Infiltration anesthesia
*d. Topical anesthesia
e. Conduction anesthesia

89. When undergoing denture-making procedures, a 50-year-old woman suddenly complained of shortness of breath and tightness in her chest. The patient coughs, her breathing is wheezing with prolonged exhalation. She has history of such symptoms occurring after a contact with allergens or airborne irritants. What emergency health condition has developed in the patient?
a. Acute heart failure
b. Acute respiratory insufficiency
*c. Bronchial asthma attack
d. Allergic rhinitis
e. Exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease

90. A 51-year-old woman complains of dry mouth, distorted sense of taste, and burning and tingling in the dorsum and sides of her tongue. The sensations disappear during eating, but intensify in the evening. They first appeared one year ago after a mental trauma. Over time the sensations intensify. The patient has history of anacid gastritis, diabetes mellitus, and disturbed sleep. During examination, the mucosa of the tongue is pale pink and has a mild amount of whitish coating. There are no marked pathological changes. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Ganglionitis of the sublingual ganglia
b. Candidal glossitis
c. Desquamative glossitis
d. Moeller-Hunter glossitis
*e. Glossodynia

91. A 52-year-old man complains of unpleasant sensations during swallowing and erosions appearing on his oral mucosa. According to the patient's medical history, the first signs of the disease appeared over a month ago. Objectively, there are bright red erosions with the remains of erupted vesicles on the unchanged mucosa of the soft palate, cheeks, and gums. The mucosa easily sloughs off. The Nikolsky's sign is positive. What drugs must be prescribed for the treatment first in this case?
a. Antibiotics
*b. Corticosteroids
c. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
d. Antifungals
e. Proteolytic enzymes

92. During the fitting of the frame of a porcelain-fused-to-metal dental bridge, the frame is in contact with the antagonist teeth in the centric occlusion, reaches the ledges on the abutment teeth, and is 0.3 mm thick. What would be the dentist's tactics in this case?
a. Obtain an impression with the frame inserted
b. File down the metal frame in the areas of its contact with the antagonist teeth
c. Identify the areas that cause problems during the insertion of the dental bridge
*d. Complete the preparation of the abutment teeth, obtain the working impression
e. Pass on the frame to the next laboratory stage

93. The parents of a 3-year-old girl brought her to a dental orthodontist. They complain of an aesthetical defect in the teeth of their child. The child has a history of a tongue sucking habit. Examination detects a vertical gap of 5 mm in the frontal region. What orthodontic appliance is indicated for the treatment of this pathology?
a. Dass activator
*b. Kraus plate
c. Kerbitz plate
d. Schonherr plate
e. Friel plate

94. A patient diagnosed with generalized parodontitis, I degree of severity, exacerbated course, presents with a decreased titer of secretory IgA in the oral fluid. What is most likely indicated by this finding?
a. Stabilization of the pathological process
b. Increased nonspecific resistance of the body
c. Reduced activity of the inflammatory process in the periodontal tissues
*d. Decreased protective function of the oral mucosa and unfavorable course of the disease
e. Decreased sensitization of the body

95. A 63-year-old completely edentulous patient (the upper jaw - Schroeder's type II, the lower jaw - Keller's type II) has the so-called "senile progeny". What factors underlie the mechanism of its development?
*a. The basal arch of the upper jaw is narrower than its alveolar arch, and the basal arch of the lower jaw is wider than its alveolar arch
b. Basal arches of the upper and lower jaw are narrower than their alveolar arches
c. Basal and alveolar arches of the upper and lower jaw are of the same width
d. Basal arches of the upper and lower jaw are wider than their alveolar arches
e. The basal arch of the upper jaw is wider than its alveolar arch, and the basal arch of the lower jaw is narrower than its alveolar arch

96. A 9-year-old boy has been diagnosed with complete dislocation of tooth 21. According to the patient's history, 20 hours have passed since the injury and the child has diabetes mellitus. What treatment tactics would be optimal in this case?
a. Replantation, tooth fixation with subsequent observation
b. Root apex resection, replantation, tooth fixation
*c. The tooth cannot be replanted and saved
d. Root canal filling with calcium-containing paste, replantation, tooth fixation
e. Root canal filling with amalgam, replantation, tooth fixation

97. A 27-year-old woman in the third month of her pregnancy came to a dentist with complaints of bad breath and constantly bleeding and enlarged gums. Objectively, the gums of the upper and lower jaw are cyanotic, edematous, cover the crowns of the teeth by 1/2, and bleed when probed. What should be the doctor's tactic after eliminating the local irritants?
a. Gingivotomy
b. Electrocoagulation of the gingival papillae
c. Deep sclerotherapy
d. Superficial sclerotherapy
*e. Phytotherapy

98. A 48-year-old man came to a dentist with complaints of feeling unwell, fever of 37.5^оC, and aching pain in the area of his tooth 48. The pain intensifies when he bites on the tooth. Objectively, the mucosa in the retromolar area is edematous and hyperemic, the distal wall of intact tooth 48 is covered with a mucosal flap, its palpation causes sharp pain and discharge of purulent exudate. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Acute purulent alveolitis
*b. Acute purulent pericoronitis
c. Acute purulent periodontitis
d. Acute purulent periostitis
e. Phlegmon of the submandibular region

99. A 12-year-old girl complains of pain in her mouth during eating. The pain has been observed over the past several days. Objectively, the mucosa of the transitional fold on the front lower jaw has two oval erosions 5 and 7 mm in size with a hyperemic border and a yellowish coating. According to the patient's medical history, similar erosions were observed one year ago. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Behcet's syndrome
b. Acute herpetic stomatitis
*c. Chronic recurrent aphthous stomatitis
d. Sutton's aphthae
e. Bednar's aphthae

100. A 31-year-old man complains of pain in the upper jaw and mobility of the right upper teeth. He has history of bloody discharge periodically appearing from the right half of his nose. Objectively, his right upper teeth are mobile, the alveolar process is deformed. X-ray shows homogeneous darkening of the right maxillary sinus and destruction of the medial wall bone that resembles "melted sugar". What is the provisional diagnosis in this case?
a. Maxillary ameloblastoma
b. Chronic maxillary osteomyelitis
c. Maxillary osteosarcoma
*d. Maxillary cancer
e. Specific maxillary sinusitis

101. A 12-year-old boy develops long-term aching pain in the area of his tooth 46 after eating hot food. Objectively, the crown of tooth 46 is dirty-gray and has a deep carious cavity. The cavity is filled with softened dentin and communicates with the pulp chamber. Deep probing of the carious cavity is painful. Heat stimuli provoke pain that slowly subsides. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Chronic deep caries
b. Chronic hypertrophic pulpitis
c. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
*d. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis
e. Chronic granulating periodontitis

102. A 54-year-old woman complains of a neoplasm on her lower lip that appeared 6 months ago. The neoplasm started rapidly growing over the past 20 days. Objectively, there is a round red-gray nodule on the vermilion border of her lower lip. The nodule is slightly raised and clearly demarcated. In its center, there is a funnel-shaped indentation, filled with keratinous masses. When palpated, the neoplasm is dense, mobile, and painless. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
*a. Keratoacanthoma
b. Verrucous leukoplakia
c. Manganotti cheilitis
d. Papilloma
e. Verrucous precancer

103. A 35-year-old man diagnosed with acute odontogenic mandibular osteomyelitis undergoes treatment at the maxillofacial surgery unit of a hospital. To control the quality of the treatment and determine further tactics, a control X-ray scan is planned. When after the onset of the disease can the first signs of bone destruction be detected on an X-ray scan?
a. In a week
b. In a month
c. In 4-5 days
d. In 2-3 days
*e. By the end of the second week

104. A 16-year-old boy after kickboxing training complains of pain in his right parotid-masseteric region, lack of teeth closure, impaired speech, and difficulty chewing. Objectively, his chin is displaced to the left, his mouth is half-open, and lateral movements of his lower jaw are limited. There is a depression in the soft tissues in front of his right tragus. Make the provisional diagnosis.
a. Left-sided posterior dislocation of the mandible
b. Left-sided anterior dislocation of the mandible
c. Right-sided posterior dislocation of the mandible
*d. Right-sided anterior dislocation of the mandible
e. Fracture of the right condylar process of the mandible

105. A porcelain-fused-to-metal dental bridge is being made for the upper jaw of a 40-year-old man. The patient made a visit for fitting the metal frame of the denture. What material should be used during the adjustments to achieve the complete fit of the frame to the abutment teeth?
*a. Corrective silicone mass
b. Copying paper
c. Base silicone mass
d. "Orthocor" material
e. Base wax

106. Two days after the extraction of tooth 46, a 29-year-old man developed complaints of dull pain in the area of the dental alveolus of the extracted tooth. Objectively, he presents with hyperemic and edematous mucosa in the area of the dental alveolus; no blood clot; food debris partially fill the socket. Make the provisional diagnosis.
a. Chronic limited osteomyelitis
b. Acute necropurulent alveolitis
*c. Acute serous alveolitis
d. Neuritis of the alveolar nerve
e. Acute purulent alveolitis

107. A 65-year-old woman came to a dentist with complaints of a mildly painful ulcer on the mucosa of her tongue. The ulcer appeared two or three weeks ago. The patient has history of chronic circulatory failure. Objectively, there is a shallow ulcer up to 1 cm in size on the lateral surface of her tongue. The ulcer has a gray-white coating. The color of the surrounding mucosa is unchanged. The ulcer is soft and moderately painful when palpated. The oral cavity is sanated. What type of ulcer is it most likely?
a. Decubital
b. Cancerous
c. Tuberculosis
*d. Trophic
e. Syphilitic

108. A 30-year-old woman complains of a painless swelling in the area of her right lower jaw. The swelling appeared 6 months ago and is slowly increasing in size. Objectively, on the body of the mandible on the right in the area of teeth 45 and 46, there is a dense neoplasm 2.5x1.5 cm in size, painless to palpation. The skin and mucosa over the neoplasm are mobile and without discoloration. The oral cavity is sanated. The teeth on the lower jaw are intact. The sensitivity of the lower lip is unchanged. Regional lymph nodes are not palpable. X-ray detects a polycystic formation with clear boundaries in the area of the body of the mandible on the right. Make the provisional diagnosis.
*a. Ameloblastoma
b. Odontogenic fibroma
c. Follicular cyst
d. Osteosarcoma
e. Odontoma

109. After sustaining an injury in a car accident, a 32-year-old man has difficulty opening his mouth. He presents with skin numbness in his left infraorbital region, as well as in the area of his upper lip and the wing of the nose, and pain in his left zygomatic region. The pain intensifies when the patient opens his mouth. Palpation detects a bony "step-off" along the left zygomaticomaxillary suture. What is the provisional diagnosis in this case?
*a. Displaced zygomatic fracture
b. Non-displaced zygomatic fracture
c. Le Fort II maxillary fracture
d. Le Fort III maxillary fracture
e. Zygomatic arch fracture

110. A 37-year-old patient has been diagnosed with acute mandibular osteomyelitis on the right in the area of teeth 45, 46, and 47. Examination detects Vincent's sign. What are the characteristics of this sign?
a. Intense pain in the area of the causative tooth
b. Painful percussion of the causative tooth and its adjacent teeth
*c. Numbness of the soft tissues of the lower lip and chin
d. Presence of an infiltrate on the both sides of the alveolar process
e. Mobility of the causative tooth and its adjacent teeth

111. The sum of the transverse dimensions of certain teeth is used to build the Hawley-Herber-Herbst diagram and is taken as the radius AB. What teeth are measured for this purpose?
a. 11, 12, 21, 22
b. 31, 32, 33
c. 31, 32, 41, 42
d. 51, 52, 61, 62
*e. 11, 12, 13

112. A 13-year-old girl complains of painful and bleeding gums during eating, bad breath, general weakness, headache, and fever of 37.5^оС, observed over the past two days. Objectively, the gingival mucosa on her upper and lower jaw is edematous, brightly hyperemic, painful, and bleeds easily when touched. The interdental papillae have a dirty-gray coating that exposes an eroded surface when removed. The bite is deep. There are large deposits of soft dental plaque. The regional lymph nodes are slightly enlarged and painful to palpation. Make the clinical diagnosis.
*a. Acute ulcerative gingivitis
b. Chronic catarrhal gingivitis
c. Generalized parodontitis
d. Chronic hypertrophic gingivitis
e. Acute catarrhal gingivitis

113. The parents of a 3-year-old girl complain of a painful rash that appeared on the child's lips, the child refusing to eat and developing fever of 38^oC. Examination detects approximately 10 small blisters with transparent contents on the skin of the perioral region. Several round erosions 1-3 mm in diameter can be observed on the mucosa of the lips. The child presents with acute catarrhal gingivitis and submandibular lymphadenitis. What can be used for etiotropic treatment in this case?
a. Antibiotics
b. Antifungals
*c. Antiviral agents
d. Antihistamines
e. Anti-inflammatory agents

114. A 28-year-old woman came to a dentist with complaints of a periodically appearing fistula on her gums in the projection of her tooth 11 and unpleasant sensations in this tooth. Previously, this tooth was treated for chronic periodontitis. The root canal of this tooth was treated twice, without a positive result. Target X-ray of tooth 11 shows that the root canal is sealed along its entire length and there is a focus of X-ray lucency 0.8 cm in size in the area of its apex. What treatment method should be used in this case?
a. Replantation
b. Repeated endodontic treatment
c. Extraction
*d. Resection of the root apex
e. Monitoring for a year

115. The parents of a 12-year-old boy complain of the sensitivity of his teeth to chemical stimuli and white spots on his upper front teeth. The spots appeared six months ago. Examination detects chalk-like spots on the vestibular surfaces of his teeth 13, 12, 11, 21, 22, 23 in their pericervical areas. The enamel over the spots has lost its luster and is rough when probed. What is the provisional diagnosis in this case?
*a. Initial active caries
b. Average active caries
c. Dental fluorosis
d. Initial inactive caries
e. Systemic enamel hypoplasia

116. A 25-year-old woman complains of acute lasting pain attacks in the area of her right lower jaw. The pain attacks can be provoked by various stimuli. The pain also occurs spontaneously at night and radiates to the right ear. After clinical examination, the diagnosis of acute diffuse pulpitis of tooth 46 was established. What is the most common route of infection spreading into the pulp?
a. Through the branching delta of the root canal
b. Hematogenous infection through the root apex
*c. From the carious cavity along the dentinal tubules
d. Lymphogenous infection through the root apex
e. In retrograde, through the apical foramen

117. During tooth extraction, a 65-year-old patient complained of sudden weakness and intense bursting retrosternal pain that was radiating to his left shoulder blade. Objectively, the following is observed: skin pallor, cyanosis of the lips, blood pressure - 90/60 mm Hg, thready pulse, rhythmic and weakened heart sounds. After three doses of nitroglycerin, the pain did not decrease. What condition is likely to be developing in the patient?
a. Cardiogenic form of anaphylactic shock
b. Angina pectoris attack
*c. Myocardial infarction
d. Collapse
e. Hypertensive crisis

118. A patient was hospitalized with a facial injury after falling from a bicycle. Objectively, there is a moderately bleeding wound with uneven edges in the zygomatic and infraorbital areas on the left. The skin around the wound is hyperemic and has punctate hemorrhages. What type of wound is it, based on the factors that have caused it?
*a. Contused wound
b. Incised wound
c. Crush injury
d. Chop wound
e. Stab wound

119. A dentist made a porcelain-fused-to-metal crown for tooth 11 of a 34-year-old patient. The tooth was prepared in compliance with all the requirements. At what stage was the gum retraction performed in this case?
a. Before fitting the frame
b. After the crown fixation
c. After obtaining the impression
*d. Before obtaining the impression
e. After fitting the frame

120. The mother of a 3-month-old girl complains of food periodically getting into the child's nasal cavity during feeding. Examination detects a cleft within the borders of the soft palate. Make the provisional diagnosis.
a. Combined non-union of the palate
b. Isolated partial non-union of the hard and soft palate
c. Isolated complete non-union of the hard and soft palate
d. Isolated occult non-union of the palate
*e. Isolated partial non-union of the soft palate

121. After examination, an 8-year-old girl was diagnosed with torsiversion of her upper lateral incisors and an arch-length deficiency caused by macrodontia. To prevent the vestibular position of the canines, a Hotz serial extraction was performed. What is the correct order of teeth extraction in this case?
a. First deciduous molars, deciduous canines, second premolars
b. First deciduous molars, deciduous canines, first premolars
c. First deciduous molars, first premolars, deciduous canines
*d. Deciduous canines, first deciduous molars, first premolars
e. Second incisors, deciduous canines, first deciduous molars

122. The parents of an 11-year-old boy brought him to a dentist with complaints that their child's gums are painful and bleed during eating, the child has bad breath and fever of 37.4^оС. The boy has recent history of an acute respiratory viral infection. Objectively, the gingival mucosa is brightly hyperemic and bleeds easily when touched. The apices of the interdental papillae are covered in a grayish necrotic coating. The removal of the coating exposes an ulcerated surface. There is a large amount of dental plaque. What is the most likely causative agent of this disease?
a. Staphylococci
b. Yeast-like fungi
c. Herpesvirus
d. Streptococci
*e. Anaerobic microflora

123. Tooth 46 is being endodontically treated for chronic fibrous periodontitis. Its root canals are narrow and sclerosed. What tool should be used to widen the root canals for their better mechanical treatment?
a. Sodium hypochlorite
*b. Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid
c. Aminocaproic acid
d. Chlorhexidine bigluconate
e. Orthophosphoric acid

124. A 34-year-old woman complains of dark brown spots on her upper front teeth. According to the patient's medical history, the spots were first detected approximately two years ago. Objectively, pigmented areas of brown enamel with clear boundaries are observed on the contact surfaces of her teeth 22 and 23. Probing is painless, the surface of the spots is rough, the probe does not catch. After drying with an air blower, the surface of the spots lost its luster and became matte. Percussion and thermal diagnostics are painless. Electric pulp testing - 4 microamperes. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Fluorosis
b. Tetracycline teeth
c. Local enamel hypoplasia
d. Medium-depth inactive lesion
*e. Initial inactive lesion

125. According to the professional standards, a dental orthopedist with work experience of 7 years and 6 months received qualification category I. How long must be the dentist's record of service, to be eligible for the next certification?
a. 9 years
b. 12 years
c. 8 years
d. 15 years
*e. 10 years

126. A 45-year-old man has been hospitalized after receiving an occupational injury to the right half of his face. According to the patient's medical history, he was injured approximately three hours ago and remained conscious since then. Objectively, in the area of the right cheek there is an irregular-shaped wound with uneven edges 5x3 cm in size. When the edges of the wound are pulled apart, non-mobile teeth become visible. Buccal mucosa is torn in the oral cavity. The bite is not impaired. What type of surgical treatment should be performed in this case?
*a. Primary early surgical treatment
b. -
c. Primary delayed surgical treatment
d. Secondary surgical treatment
e. Primary late surgical treatment

127. A patient is to undergo endodontic treatment of tooth 21 due to exacerbation of chronic pulpitis. The dentist chooses the tools for the treatment. What is the function of a spreader?
a. Pulp removal from root canals
b. Assessment of root canal patency
c. Widening of root canals
*d. Filling of root canals
e. Measuring the length of root canals

128. After examination, a dental orthodontist has diagnosed an 11-year-old girl with microdontia of the upper incisors. What diagnostic method is used to determine the proportionality of the size of permanent upper and lower incisors?
a. Korkhaus index
b. Gerlach index
c. Howe's analysis
*d. Tonn's formula
e. Pont's index

129. A non-removable porcelain-fused-to-metal dental bridge is being made for a 35-year-old patient. Double mix impressions have been obtained using "Speedex" C-silicone material. The impressions were then sent for disinfection. What antiseptic solution should be used for this purpose?
*a. 0.5% sodium hypochlorite solution
b. 70% alcohol solution
c. 1.5% sodium bicarbonate solution
d. 0.5% hydrogen peroxide solution
e. 3% chloramine solution

130. A 25-year-old man came to a dentist with complaints of isolated transverse grooves on the crowns of some of his upper teeth. The defects were detected immediately after tooth eruption. According to the patient's medical history, in his childhood at the age of under a year he had frequent acute respiratory viral infections. Objectively, in the middle of the coronal part of teeth 16, 11, 21, and 26, there are isolated horizontal depressions (girdles) within the enamel. The grooves do not stain with methylene blue. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Amelogenesis imperfecta
*b. Systemic enamel hypoplasia
c. Fluorosis
d. Enamel hyperplasia
e. Erosion of dental hard tissues

131. The parents of an 8-year-old girl brought her to a dental orthodontist for a preventive examination. Objectively, her lower lip protrudes, the shape of her upper dentition is trapezoidal, while the lower dentition is normal. Between the upper and lower front teeth there is a sagittal gap 2 mm wide, the closure of the first permanent molars is Angle's class III. What dental appliance should be used to treat this occlusion pathology?
a. Muhlemann propulsor
b. Bracket system
*c. Frankel functional regulator, type III
d. Schonherr plate
e. Frankel functional regulator, type I

132. A 26-year-old man came to a dentist with complaints of fever of 37.2^oC and facial asymmetry that appeared due to painful swelling in his left parotid region 3 days ago. According to the patient's medical history, two weeks ago he recovered from an acute respiratory viral infection. Objectively, there is a dense, round, poorly mobile, moderately painful infiltrate under 2 cm in diameter in his left parotid-masseteric region. The duct of the parotid salivary gland produces transparent saliva. Make the provisional diagnosis.
a. Exacerbation of chronic parotitis
b. Pleomorphic adenoma of the parotid gland
c. Acute suppurative parotitis
*d. Herzenberg's pseudoparotitis
e. Mikulicz's disease

133. A 2-year-old child has received a dental trauma. Objectively, the crowns of teeth 51 and 61 are shorter than the crowns of the adjacent teeth by 1/3. The mucosa in the area of teeth 51 and 61 is hyperemic and edematous. X-ray shows no periodontal gap in the apical part of the roots of teeth 51 and 61. What treatment tactics would be optimal in this case?
*a. Regular check-ups
b. Replantation
c. Extraction of teeth 51 and 61
d. Reposition of teeth 51 and 61
e. Ligature splinting

134. A 36-year-old woman came to a dentist with complaints of destruction of her lower lateral tooth. Objectively, the masticatory and mesial surfaces of her tooth 46 have a deep carious cavity, the interdental contact is impaired. The doctor plans to make an inlay for the patient. What is the Black's class of this carious cavity?
a. III
b. V
*c. II
d. IV
e. I

135. An orthodontist performs the Eschler-Bittner clinical test for a patient with distal occlusion for differential diagnosis. Improvement of the shape and profile of the patient's face can be observed as a result. What form of distal occlusion is it, based on the test results?
a. Excessive development of the upper jaw
b. Maldevelopment of both jaws
*c. Underdevelopment of the lower jaw
d. Underdevelopment of the upper jaw
e. Excessive development of the lower jaw

136. A 45-year-old man complains of pain and creaking in the area of his temporomandibular joint during lower jaw movements. Objectively, his face is symmetrical, the mouth opens with a slight displacement to the left. The dentition is preserved. To clarify the diagnosis, an X-ray scan of the temporomandibular joint is planned. What type of X-ray scan would be most informative in this case?
a. Parma X-ray projection
b. Schuller X-ray projection
c. Orthopantomography
*d. Computed tomography of the temporomandibular joint
e. Teleradiography

137. A 38-year-old patient undergoes preparations for installation of dentures. He presents with perforated floor of the pulp chamber in the bifurcation area of the roots of tooth 46. Objectively, the dentition is intact, tooth 46 is stable, there are no periodontal pockets in this area. X-ray detects no pathological changes in the periapical area of the roots of tooth 46. The root canals of tooth 46 are filled to their full length. Mild resorption can be observed at the apex of the interradicular septum in the bifurcation area of the roots of tooth 46. What type of tooth-preserving operation is indicated in this case?
a. Replantation
b. Resection
c. Hemisection
d. Amputation
*e. Bicuspidization

138. A 14-year-old boy complains of fever of 38-39 ^оC that has been observed over the last 5 days, runny nose, and sore throat. Examination detects signs of catarrhal stomatitis, tonsillitis, and pharyngitis and enlarged lymph nodes along the sternocleidomastoid muscle. The lymph nodes resemble a chain and are mobile and mildly painful when palpated. The palatine tonsils are sharply hyperemic and covered in plaque that can be easily removed. Make the provisional diagnosis.
a. Herpetic tonsillitis
*b. Infectious mononucleosis
c. Scarlet fever
d. Diphtheria
e. Acute candidal stomatitis

139. A 32-year-old woman complains of white and pigmented spots on her teeth. She lives in an area, where fluorine levels in drinking water are 1.7 mg/L. She has been diagnosed with fluorosis, chalky-speckled form. What toothpastes are indicated in this case?
a. Highly abrasive toothpastes
b. Triclosan-containing toothpastes
*c. Calcium phosphate-containing toothpastes
d. Toothpastes with herbal extracts
e. Fluorine-containing toothpastes

140. Removable dentures were made for a 5-year-old girl due to the early loss of deciduous second molars. When will the dentures need replacing in this case?
*a. In 0.5 years
b. In 2.5 years
c. In 2 years
d. In 1.5 years
e. In 1 year

141. Complete removable dentures are being made for the upper and lower jaw of a 65-year-old patient. A markedly progenic ratio of the jaws has been detected. What will be the specifics of the teeth arrangement in these dentures?
a. The lower dental arch must be shortened by two premolars
b. The front teeth must be placed without the artificial gum
*c. The upper dental arch must be shortened by two premolars
d. The upper dental arch must be shortened by two molars
e. The lower dental arch must be shortened by two molars

142. A bugel (clasp) denture is being made for the upper jaw of a 54-year-old patient. The working impression has been obtained with a silicone impression material, while the auxiliary impression has been made with an alginate material. How many casts must be made to make one bugel denture?
a. One working cast
b. One working cast and one auxiliary cast
*c. Two working casts and one auxiliary cast
d. One working cast and two auxiliary casts
e. Two working casts and two auxiliary casts

143. The parents of a 2-month-old boy brought him to a dentist with complaints of a congenital defect of the upper lip in the child. Objectively, there is a fissure-like defect in the tissues of the upper lip on the left, which passes through all the tissues of the lip and stops 4 mm from reaching the nasal passage. The integrity of the alveolar process and hard palate is preserved. Make the diagnosis.
a. Congenital complete left-sided non-union of the upper lip
b. Congenital incomplete bilateral non-union of the upper lip
c. Congenital hidden left-sided non-union of the upper lip
d. Oblique non-union of the face
*e. Congenital incomplete left-sided non-union of the upper lip

144. The parents of a 10-year-old girl brought her to a dentist for sanation of her oral cavity. Examination detects deep open fissures in her teeth 14 and 24, the enamel there is dense and poorly mineralized. The decay-missing-filled index is \mbox{DFM+df=2+3=5. The Greene-Vermillion index is 1.9. What should be the dentist's tactics in this case?
a. Applications with fluoride-containing preparations
*b. Non-invasive sealing of the fissures
c. Invasive sealing of the fissures
d. Preventive filling
e. Applications with antiseptic preparations

145. A dentist has diagnosed a 26-year-old patient with medium-depth inactive caries of tooth 24. What method of anesthesia would be optimal, when providing treatment in this case?
*a. Infiltration anesthesia
b. Inhalation anesthesia
c. Non-inhalation anesthesia
d. Topical anesthesia
e. Conduction anesthesia

146. A patient has been hospitalized to the maxillofacial surgery unit of a hospital with the diagnosis of traumatic open right-sided mental fracture of the mandible with displacement of the fragments. What is the typical direction of displacement for the larger fragment?
*a. Downwards and towards the fracture
b. Downwards and outwards
c. Only towards the fracture
d. Upwards and towards the fracture
e. Upwards and outwards

147. A 34-year-old woman came to a dentist with complaints of brief pain attacks caused by thermal stimuli in her teeth 34 and 35. Objectively, the visible surfaces of teeth 34 and 35 are intact, the contact surfaces cannot be examined due to the dense arrangement of the teeth. What examination technique would be most informative in this case, if a carious cavity is suspected on the contact surfaces of the teeth?
a. Probing
*b. X-ray
c. Electric pulp testing
d. Vital staining
e. Percussion

148. When inspecting the completed full removable laminar denture received from the dental laboratory, the dentist discovered a characteristic "marble" pattern in the form of whitish lines on the surface and in the thick of the base plastic, from which the denture was made. What is the likely cause of these lines appearing on the denture?
a. Insufficient amount of plastic dough during packing
b. Insufficient pressure applied to the plastic dough during polymerization
*c. Insufficient amount of monomer in the plastic dough during packing
d. Insufficient polishing of the denture
e. Incorrect temperature during polymerization

149. A 56-year-old man complains of pain and swelling in his left buccal region and progressing facial asymmetry, first noticed two months ago. Objectively, he has paresis of the mimic muscles on the left and a lumpy infiltrate without clear borders in the left parotid-masseteric region. The skin over the infiltrate is thinned and cyanotic. Enlarged regional lymph nodes are palpable on the left. The mouth opening is reduced to 2.5 cm. No saliva is secreted from the duct of the left parotid gland. Make the provisional diagnosis.
a. Chronic lymphadenitis
b. Cyst of the parotid gland
c. Acute non-epidemic parotitis
*d. Adenocarcinoma
e. Chronic sialadenitis

150. A 9-year-old girl complains of painful rashes that appeared on the lips. Objectively, the vermilion border of the lips is edematous, hyperemic, and covered in cracks and numerous bloody scabs. On the skin around the lips, there are small blisters with serous content. In some areas, the blisters merge together. Maceration and weeping of the skin are observed, especially in the corners of the mouth. What type of cheilitis has developed in the patient?
a. Exfoliative
b. Atopic
c. Meteorological
*d. Eczematous
e. Actinic

