1. "Collargol" pharmaceutical preparation is a colloidal solution of silver that contains a high-molecular compound. What is the function of this compound?
*a. Increases aggregate stability
b. Increases degree of dispersion
c. Decreases aggregate stability
d. Induces coagulation
e. Facilitates sedimentation
2. "Collargol" pharmaceutical preparation is a colloidal solution of silver that contains a high-molecular compound. What is the function of this compound?
*a. Increases aggregate stability
b. Increases degree of dispersion
c. Induces coagulation
d. Decreases aggregate stability
e. Facilitates sedimentation
3. "Collargol" pharmaceutical preparation is a colloidal solution of silver that contains a high-molecular compound. What is the function of this compound?
a. Induces coagulation
b. Decreases aggregate stability
c. Facilitates sedimentation
*d. Increases aggregate stability
e. Increases degree of dispersion
4. "Protargol" and "collargol" colloidal silver preparations contain protein compounds besides their active substance. What is the function of proteins in these drugs?
*a. Prevention of coagulation of the colloidal solution
b. Increased shelf life
c. Improved drug technology
d. Increased bactericidal effect of silver
e. Decreased side effects
5. "Protargol" and "collargol" colloidal silver preparations contain protein compounds besides their active substance. What is the function of proteins in these drugs?
a. Decreased side effects
*b. Prevention of coagulation of the colloidal solution
c. Increased bactericidal effect of silver
d. Increased shelf life
e. Improved drug technology
6. "Protargol" and "collargol" colloidal silver preparations contain protein compounds besides their active substance. What is the function of proteins in these drugs?
a. Increased shelf life
b. Increased bactericidal effect of silver
*c. Prevention of coagulation of the colloidal solution
d. Improved drug technology
e. Decreased side effects
7. 1 minute after a patient had been administered penicillin the patient's arterial pressure sharply dropped, pulse became thready, cold sweating and clonic convulsions began. Name this condition:
a. Burn shock
b. Cardiogenic shock
*c. Anaphylactic shock
d. Septic shock
e. Traumatic shock
8. 1 minute after a patient had been administered penicillin the patient's arterial pressure sharply dropped, pulse became thready, cold sweating and clonic convulsions began. Name this condition:
a. Burn shock
b. Septic shock
c. Traumatic shock
d. Cardiogenic shock
*e. Anaphylactic shock
9. 1 minute after a patient had been administered penicillin the patient's arterial pressure sharply dropped, pulse became thready, cold sweating and clonic convulsions began. Name this condition:
a. Traumatic shock
b. Septic shock
c. Cardiogenic shock
*d. Anaphylactic shock
e. Burn shock
10. A 10-year-old boy ate 0.5 kg of sweets, which exceeds his daily energy needs. As a result, the synthesis of a certain substance will activate in this child. Name this substance.
*a. Glycogen
b. Raffinose
c. Sucrose
d. Lactose
e. Starch
11. A 10-year-old boy ate 0.5 kg of sweets, which exceeds his daily energy needs. As a result, the synthesis of a certain substance will activate in this child. Name this substance.
*a. Glycogen
b. Sucrose
c. Raffinose
d. Lactose
e. Starch
12. A 10-year-old boy ate 0.5 kg of sweets, which exceeds his daily energy needs. As a result, the synthesis of a certain substance will activate in this child. Name this substance.
a. Lactose
*b. Glycogen
c. Sucrose
d. Starch
e. Raffinose
13. A 10-year-old child has height of 178 cm and body mass of 67 kg. These presentations are caused by the functional disturbance of the:
a. Adrenal glands
b. Gonads
*c. Pituitary gland
d. Parathyroid glands
e. Thyroid gland
14. A 10-year-old child has height of 178 cm and body mass of 67 kg. These presentations are caused by the functional disturbance of the:
a. Parathyroid glands
b. Gonads
c. Thyroid gland
d. Adrenal glands
*e. Pituitary gland
15. A 10-year-old child has height of 178 cm and body mass of 67 kg. These presentations are caused by the functional disturbance of the:
a. Thyroid gland
b. Gonads
c. Parathyroid glands
*d. Pituitary gland
e. Adrenal glands
16. A 12-year-old boy is of short stature, but his mental development corresponds with that of his age group. What hormone deficiency is the most likely to cause this pathology?
*a. Somatotropin
b. Vasopressin
c. Oxytocin
d. Insulin
e. Adrenaline
17. A 12-year-old boy is of short stature, but his mental development corresponds with that of his age group. What hormone deficiency is the most likely to cause this pathology?
a. Adrenaline
*b. Somatotropin
c. Insulin
d. Vasopressin
e. Oxytocin
18. A 12-year-old boy is of short stature, but his mental development corresponds with that of his age group. What hormone deficiency is the most likely to cause this pathology?
a. Adrenaline
b. Vasopressin
*c. Somatotropin
d. Oxytocin
e. Insulin
19. A 13-year-old female patient, having suffered from measles, complains of dry mouth, thirst, body weight loss, polyuria; her glucose concentration in blood is 16 mmol/l. What disease can be suspected?
*a. Type I pancreatic diabetes
b. Steroidogenic diabetes
c. Type II pancreatic diabetes
d. Glycogenosis
e. Diabetes insipidus
20. A 13-year-old female patient, having suffered from measles, complains of dry mouth, thirst, body weight loss, polyuria; her glucose concentration in blood is 16 mmol/l. What disease can be suspected?
a. Diabetes insipidus
*b. Type I pancreatic diabetes
c. Type II pancreatic diabetes
d. Glycogenosis
e. Steroidogenic diabetes
21. A 13-year-old female patient, having suffered from measles, complains of dry mouth, thirst, body weight loss, polyuria; her glucose concentration in blood is 16 mmol/l. What disease can be suspected?
a. Glycogenosis
b. Diabetes insipidus
c. Steroidogenic diabetes
d. Type II pancreatic diabetes
*e. Type I pancreatic diabetes
22. A 22-year-old male was stung by bees, the affected region became hyperemic and edematous. What is the leading mechanism of edema development in this patient?
a. Increased oncotic pressure of tissue fluid
*b. Increased permeability of the capillaries
c. Reduced oncotic pressure of blood
d. Decreased hydrostatic blood pressure in the capillaries
e. Impaired lymphatic efflux
23. A 22-year-old male was stung by bees, the affected region became hyperemic and edematous. What is the leading mechanism of edema development in this patient?
a. Increased oncotic pressure of tissue fluid
b. Decreased hydrostatic blood pressure in the capillaries
*c. Increased permeability of the capillaries
d. Reduced oncotic pressure of blood
e. Impaired lymphatic efflux
24. A 22-year-old male was stung by bees, the affected region became hyperemic and edematous. What is the leading mechanism of edema development in this patient?
a. Reduced oncotic pressure of blood
b. Decreased hydrostatic blood pressure in the capillaries
*c. Increased permeability of the capillaries
d. Impaired lymphatic efflux
e. Increased oncotic pressure of tissue fluid
25. A 23-year-old man came to the infectious diseases department with complaints of abdominal distension and diarrhea. He was diagnosed with lambliasis. What type of leukocytosis is characteristic of this disease?
a. Monocytic
b. Basophilic
c. Lymphocytic
d. Neutrophilic
*e. Eosinophilic
26. A 23-year-old man came to the infectious diseases department with complaints of abdominal distension and diarrhea. He was diagnosed with lambliasis. What type of leukocytosis is characteristic of this disease?
a. Neutrophilic
b. Basophilic
c. Monocytic
d. Lymphocytic
*e. Eosinophilic
27. A 23-year-old man came to the infectious diseases department with complaints of abdominal distension and diarrhea. He was diagnosed with lambliasis. What type of leukocytosis is characteristic of this disease?
a. Neutrophilic
b. Lymphocytic
c. Basophilic
*d. Eosinophilic
e. Monocytic
28. A 23-year-old patient has laryngeal diphtheria that manifests as classic clinical signs with the development of true croup. What type of inflammation is characteristic of this disease?
*a. Fibrinous
b. Purulent
c. Serous
d. Putrid
e. Croupous
29. A 23-year-old patient has laryngeal diphtheria that manifests as classic clinical signs with the development of true croup. What type of inflammation is characteristic of this disease?
a. Croupous
b. Serous
c. Putrid
d. Purulent
*e. Fibrinous
30. A 23-year-old patient has laryngeal diphtheria that manifests as classic clinical signs with the development of true croup. What type of inflammation is characteristic of this disease?
a. Serous
b. Putrid
*c. Fibrinous
d. Croupous
e. Purulent
31. A 25-year-old man has an appointment with the dentist. Several minutes after his oral cavity was lavaged with furacilin (nitrofurazone) the patient developed significant labial edema. What type of allergic reaction is observed in this case?
*a. Anaphylactic
b. Immune complex
c. Delayed-type hypersensitivity
d. Stimulated
e. Cytolytic
32. A 25-year-old man has an appointment with the dentist. Several minutes after his oral cavity was lavaged with furacilin (nitrofurazone) the patient developed significant labial edema. What type of allergic reaction is observed in this case?
*a. Anaphylactic
b. Stimulated
c. Delayed-type hypersensitivity
d. Cytolytic
e. Immune complex
33. A 25-year-old man has an appointment with the dentist. Several minutes after his oral cavity was lavaged with furacilin (nitrofurazone) the patient developed significant labial edema. What type of allergic reaction is observed in this case?
a. Delayed-type hypersensitivity
b. Stimulated
*c. Anaphylactic
d. Cytolytic
e. Immune complex
34. A 25-year-old-patient with the II degree thermal burns came to the doctor. Objectively: there are large blisters on the upper limbs; the blisters are filled with clear exudate consisting mostly of water and albumines with isolated leukocytes. Name this type of exudate:
a. Fibrinous
b. Catarrhal (mucous)
c. Purulent
*d. Serous
e. Hemorrhagic
35. A 25-year-old-patient with the II degree thermal burns came to the doctor. Objectively: there are large blisters on the upper limbs; the blisters are filled with clear exudate consisting mostly of water and albumines with isolated leukocytes. Name this type of exudate:
a. Fibrinous
b. Hemorrhagic
*c. Serous
d. Catarrhal (mucous)
e. Purulent
36. A 25-year-old-patient with the II degree thermal burns came to the doctor. Objectively: there are large blisters on the upper limbs; the blisters are filled with clear exudate consisting mostly of water and albumines with isolated leukocytes. Name this type of exudate:
a. Purulent
b. Fibrinous
c. Catarrhal (mucous)
*d. Serous
e. Hemorrhagic
37. A 28-year-old man with peptic ulcer of the stomach was prescribed a drug that inhibits gastric juice secretion. Specify this drug:
a. Duphalac (Lactulose)
b. Ethacrynic acid
c. Lidocaine
*d. Omeprazole
e. Fenofibrate
38. A 28-year-old man with peptic ulcer of the stomach was prescribed a drug that inhibits gastric juice secretion. Specify this drug:
a. Ethacrynic acid
b. Duphalac (Lactulose)
*c. Omeprazole
d. Fenofibrate
e. Lidocaine
39. A 28-year-old man with peptic ulcer of the stomach was prescribed a drug that inhibits gastric juice secretion. Specify this drug:
a. Lidocaine
b. Ethacrynic acid
c. Duphalac (Lactulose)
d. Fenofibrate
*e. Omeprazole
40. A 28-year-old patient has a subfebrile fever. This type of fever is observed when body temperature fluctuates within the following range:
a. 38--39^oC
b. 39--41^oC
*c. 37--37.9^oC
d. 36.6--37^oC
e. Over 41^oC
41. A 28-year-old patient has a subfebrile fever. This type of fever is observed when body temperature fluctuates within the following range:
a. 39--41^oC
b. 36.6--37^oC
c. Over 41^oC
*d. 37--37.9^oC
e. 38--39^oC
42. A 2M solution of HCl was added into the studied solution, resulting in formation of a white precipitate that dissolved when heated. What cations are present in the solution?
a. Ba^2+
*b. Pb^2+
c. Ag^+
d. Hg^22+
e. Mg^2+
43. A 2M solution of HCl was added into the studied solution, resulting in formation of a white precipitate that dissolved when heated. What cations are present in the solution?
a. Ba^2+
b. Mg^2+
*c. Pb^2+
d. Ag^+
e. Hg^22+
44. A 2M solution of HCl was added into the studied solution, resulting in formation of a white precipitate that dissolved when heated. What cations are present in the solution?
a. Mg^2+
b. Ag^+
*c. Pb^2+
d. Ba^2+
e. Hg^22+
45. A 3.5-year-old child has been diagnosed with dysbacteriosis in the form of critical reduction of gram-positive anaerobic bacteria and increased number of staphylococci and yeast fungi. What preparation should be used for the correction of dysbacteriosis?
a. Coli-Proteus bacteriophage
b. Lactoglobulin
c. Colibacterin
*d. Bifidumbacterin
e. Furazolidone
46. A 3.5-year-old child has been diagnosed with dysbacteriosis in the form of critical reduction of gram-positive anaerobic bacteria and increased number of staphylococci and yeast fungi. What preparation should be used for the correction of dysbacteriosis?
a. Furazolidone
*b. Bifidumbacterin
c. Lactoglobulin
d. Coli-Proteus bacteriophage
e. Colibacterin
47. A 3.5-year-old child has been diagnosed with dysbacteriosis in the form of critical reduction of gram-positive anaerobic bacteria and increased number of staphylococci and yeast fungi. What preparation should be used for the correction of dysbacteriosis?
a. Lactoglobulin
*b. Bifidumbacterin
c. Colibacterin
d. Furazolidone
e. Coli-Proteus bacteriophage
48. A 30-year-old patient has been hospitalized with complaints of increased body temperature, jaundice, and hemorrhagic rash on the skin and mucosa. A few days later, the patient developed acute renal failure. Microscopy of smears stained using the Romanowsky-Giemsa technique revealed twisting bacteria with secondary coils shaped like letters S and C) What bacteria are the most likely cause of the patient's disease?
a. Bordetella
b. Treponema
*c. Leptospira
d. Salmonella
e. Borrelia
49. A 30-year-old patient has been hospitalized with complaints of increased body temperature, jaundice, and hemorrhagic rash on the skin and mucosa. A few days later, the patient developed acute renal failure. Microscopy of smears stained using the Romanowsky-Giemsa technique revealed twisting bacteria with secondary coils shaped like letters S and C) What bacteria are the most likely cause of the patient's disease?
a. Salmonella
b. Borrelia
*c. Leptospira
d. Treponema
e. Bordetella
50. A 30-year-old patient has been hospitalized with complaints of increased body temperature, jaundice, and hemorrhagic rash on the skin and mucosa. A few days later, the patient developed acute renal failure. Microscopy of smears stained using the Romanowsky-Giemsa technique revealed twisting bacteria with secondary coils shaped like letters S and C) What bacteria are the most likely cause of the patient's disease?
a. Salmonella
b. Borrelia
c. Bordetella
*d. Leptospira
e. Treponema
51. A 32-year-old man with suspected alkaloid poisoning was brought into the admission room of an emergency hospital. What should be used for gastric lavage in this case?
*a. Potassium permanganate
b. Furacilin (Nitrofural)
c. Sodium chloride
d. Unithiol (Dimercaptopropansulfonate)
e. Magnesium sulfate
52. A 32-year-old man with suspected alkaloid poisoning was brought into the admission room of an emergency hospital. What should be used for gastric lavage in this case?
*a. Potassium permanganate
b. Unithiol (Dimercaptopropansulfonate)
c. Furacilin (Nitrofural)
d. Sodium chloride
e. Magnesium sulfate
53. A 32-year-old man with suspected alkaloid poisoning was brought into the admission room of an emergency hospital. What should be used for gastric lavage in this case?
a. Sodium chloride
b. Magnesium sulfate
c. Unithiol (Dimercaptopropansulfonate)
d. Furacilin (Nitrofural)
*e. Potassium permanganate
54. A 33-year-old female patient, who undergoes long-term treatment due to chronic polyarthritis, complains of increased arterial pressure, adipose tissue redistribution and menstrual irregularities. What drug does the patient take?
a. Fluocinolone acetonide
b. Indometacin
c. Diclofenac sodium
*d. Prednisolone
e. Phenylbutazone
55. A 33-year-old female patient, who undergoes long-term treatment due to chronic polyarthritis, complains of increased arterial pressure, adipose tissue redistribution and menstrual irregularities. What drug does the patient take?
a. Indometacin
*b. Prednisolone
c. Phenylbutazone
d. Diclofenac sodium
e. Fluocinolone acetonide
56. A 33-year-old female patient, who undergoes long-term treatment due to chronic polyarthritis, complains of increased arterial pressure, adipose tissue redistribution and menstrual irregularities. What drug does the patient take?
a. Phenylbutazone
b. Fluocinolone acetonide
c. Indometacin
*d. Prednisolone
e. Diclofenac sodium
57. A 33-year-old woman was admitted into a psychiatric hospital with an anxiety disorder of neurotic origin. What drug is indicated in this case?
*a. Diazepam
b. Valerian extract
c. Levodopa
d. Naloxone
e. Droperidol
58. A 33-year-old woman was admitted into a psychiatric hospital with an anxiety disorder of neurotic origin. What drug is indicated in this case?
a. Droperidol
*b. Diazepam
c. Levodopa
d. Valerian extract
e. Naloxone
59. A 33-year-old woman was admitted into a psychiatric hospital with an anxiety disorder of neurotic origin. What drug is indicated in this case?
a. Levodopa
b. Valerian extract
c. Naloxone
d. Droperidol
*e. Diazepam
60. A 35-year-old woman came to a doctor with complaints of headache, insomnia, loss of appetite, abdominal pain, a fever of 39--40^oС, and a rash that appeared on her abdomen. The woman was clinically diagnosed with typhoid fever. A sample of patient's blood serum was sent to a laboratory for serological testing with antibody detection. What serological test must be performed to confirm this diagnosis?
a. Hemagglutination inhibition assay
b. Ascoli precipitation test
c. Wasserman complement fixation test
*d. Widal agglutination test
e. Immunofluorescence assay
61. A 35-year-old woman came to a doctor with complaints of headache, insomnia, loss of appetite, abdominal pain, a fever of 39--40^oС, and a rash that appeared on her abdomen. The woman was clinically diagnosed with typhoid fever. A sample of patient's blood serum was sent to a laboratory for serological testing with antibody detection. What serological test must be performed to confirm this diagnosis?
a. Immunofluorescence assay
b. Ascoli precipitation test
c. Wasserman complement fixation test
*d. Widal agglutination test
e. Hemagglutination inhibition assay
62. A 35-year-old woman came to a doctor with complaints of headache, insomnia, loss of appetite, abdominal pain, a fever of 39--40^oС, and a rash that appeared on her abdomen. The woman was clinically diagnosed with typhoid fever. A sample of patient's blood serum was sent to a laboratory for serological testing with antibody detection. What serological test must be performed to confirm this diagnosis?
a. Wasserman complement fixation test
b. Immunofluorescence assay
c. Hemagglutination inhibition assay
d. Ascoli precipitation test
*e. Widal agglutination test
63. A 36-year-old man has no hydrochloric acid or pepsin in his gastric juice. What is this condition called?
*a. Achylia
b. Achlorhydria
c. Cholemia
d. Hypochlorhydria
e. Hyperchlorhydria
64. A 36-year-old man has no hydrochloric acid or pepsin in his gastric juice. What is this condition called?
a. Hyperchlorhydria
*b. Achylia
c. Achlorhydria
d. Hypochlorhydria
e. Cholemia
65. A 36-year-old man has no hydrochloric acid or pepsin in his gastric juice. What is this condition called?
a. Hypochlorhydria
*b. Achylia
c. Achlorhydria
d. Hyperchlorhydria
e. Cholemia
66. A 40-year-old man was prescribed antibiotics as a part of the complex therapy for peptic ulcer disease of the stomach. Which of the following combinations is indicated in this case?
a. Levomycetin (chloramphenicol) +  ampicillin
*b. Amoxicillin + clarithromycin
c. Oxacillin + nalidixic acid
d. Phenoxymethylpenicillin + lincomycin
e. Streptomycin + benzylpenicillin
67. A 40-year-old man was prescribed antibiotics as a part of the complex therapy for peptic ulcer disease of the stomach. Which of the following combinations is indicated in this case?
a. Phenoxymethylpenicillin + lincomycin
*b. Amoxicillin + clarithromycin
c. Levomycetin (chloramphenicol) +  ampicillin
d. Streptomycin + benzylpenicillin
e. Oxacillin + nalidixic acid
68. A 40-year-old man was prescribed antibiotics as a part of the complex therapy for peptic ulcer disease of the stomach. Which of the following combinations is indicated in this case?
a. Streptomycin + benzylpenicillin
b. Oxacillin + nalidixic acid
c. Phenoxymethylpenicillin + lincomycin
d. Levomycetin (chloramphenicol) +  ampicillin
*e. Amoxicillin + clarithromycin
69. A 40-year-old man with allergic rhinitis has come to the dispensing chemist. He wants to substitute dimedrol (diphenhydramine), that he currently takes, with another antihistamine because dimedrol makes him drowsy and unable to concentrate. What drug would the dispensing chemist recommend?
a. Aevit (Vitamins A and E)
b. Retabolil (Nandrolone)
*c. Loratadine
d. Laferon (Interferon alfa-2b)
e. Analgin (Metamizole)
70. A 40-year-old man with allergic rhinitis has come to the dispensing chemist. He wants to substitute dimedrol (diphenhydramine), that he currently takes, with another antihistamine because dimedrol makes him drowsy and unable to concentrate. What drug would the dispensing chemist recommend?
a. Analgin (Metamizole)
b. Laferon (Interferon alfa-2b)
c. Aevit (Vitamins A and E)
*d. Loratadine
e. Retabolil (Nandrolone)
71. A 40-year-old man with allergic rhinitis has come to the dispensing chemist. He wants to substitute dimedrol (diphenhydramine), that he currently takes, with another antihistamine because dimedrol makes him drowsy and unable to concentrate. What drug would the dispensing chemist recommend?
a. Retabolil (Nandrolone)
b. Laferon (Interferon alfa-2b)
*c. Loratadine
d. Analgin (Metamizole)
e. Aevit (Vitamins A and E)
72. A 40-year-old patient has developed polyuria (10-12 liters per day) and polydipsia induced by damage to the hypothalamo-hypophyseal tract. What hormone deficiency causes such disorders?
*a. Vasopressin
b. Thyrotropin
c. Oxytocin
d. Somatotropin
e. Corticotropin
73. A 40-year-old patient has developed polyuria (10-12 liters per day) and polydipsia induced by damage to the hypothalamo-hypophyseal tract. What hormone deficiency causes such disorders?
a. Oxytocin
b. Corticotropin
c. Thyrotropin
d. Somatotropin
*e. Vasopressin
74. A 40-year-old patient has developed polyuria (10-12 liters per day) and polydipsia induced by damage to the hypothalamo-hypophyseal tract. What hormone deficiency causes such disorders?
a. Thyrotropin
b. Somatotropin
c. Corticotropin
*d. Vasopressin
e. Oxytocin
75. A 40-year-old woman has been suffering from menorrhagia for a long time. Blood test: Hb- 90 g/L, erythrocytes - 3.9cdot10^12/L, color index - 0.69. What is the main cause of hypochromic anemia development in this case?
*a. Iron loss due to bleeding
b. Non-absorption of iron in the body
c. Insufficient iron intake with food
d. Increased iron consumption
e. Vitamin B_12 deficiency
76. A 40-year-old woman has been suffering from menorrhagia for a long time. Blood test: Hb- 90 g/L, erythrocytes - 3.9cdot10^12/L, color index - 0.69. What is the main cause of hypochromic anemia development in this case?
a. Increased iron consumption
*b. Iron loss due to bleeding
c. Insufficient iron intake with food
d. Non-absorption of iron in the body
e. Vitamin B_12 deficiency
77. A 40-year-old woman has been suffering from menorrhagia for a long time. Blood test: Hb- 90 g/L, erythrocytes - 3.9cdot10^12/L, color index - 0.69. What is the main cause of hypochromic anemia development in this case?
a. Insufficient iron intake with food
*b. Iron loss due to bleeding
c. Increased iron consumption
d. Vitamin B_12 deficiency
e. Non-absorption of iron in the body
78. A 45-year-old man suffers from antacid gastritis. In this case, disturbed production of the following substance can be observed in the patient's stomach:
*a. Hydrochloric acid
b. Gastricsin
c. Mucus
d. Pepsin
e. Intrinsic antianemic factor
79. A 45-year-old man suffers from antacid gastritis. In this case, disturbed production of the following substance can be observed in the patient's stomach:
a. Gastricsin
b. Pepsin
c. Intrinsic antianemic factor
*d. Hydrochloric acid
e. Mucus
80. A 45-year-old man suffers from antacid gastritis. In this case, disturbed production of the following substance can be observed in the patient's stomach:
a. Intrinsic antianemic factor
b. Gastricsin
c. Mucus
*d. Hydrochloric acid
e. Pepsin
81. A 45-year-old patient with rheumatoid arthritis was prescribed a glucocorticoid. Name this drug:
*a. Prednisolone
b. Analgine (Metamizole)
c. Ibuprofen
d. Mefenamic acid
e. Insulin
82. A 45-year-old patient with rheumatoid arthritis was prescribed a glucocorticoid. Name this drug:
a. Insulin
*b. Prednisolone
c. Mefenamic acid
d. Ibuprofen
e. Analgine (Metamizole)
83. A 45-year-old patient with rheumatoid arthritis was prescribed a glucocorticoid. Name this drug:
a. Mefenamic acid
b. Insulin
c. Ibuprofen
*d. Prednisolone
e. Analgine (Metamizole)
84. A 47-year-old patient with bilateral pneumonia has a disruption of acid-base balance - compensated gaseous acidosis. What is the most probable mechanism of compensatory adaptation that maintains the patient's acid-base balance?
*a. Intensified acidogenesis in kidneys
b. Vomiting
c. Decreased reabsorption of hydrogen carbonate in kidneys
d. Pulmonary hyperventilation
e. Diarrhea
85. A 47-year-old patient with bilateral pneumonia has a disruption of acid-base balance - compensated gaseous acidosis. What is the most probable mechanism of compensatory adaptation that maintains the patient's acid-base balance?
a. Diarrhea
*b. Intensified acidogenesis in kidneys
c. Pulmonary hyperventilation
d. Decreased reabsorption of hydrogen carbonate in kidneys
e. Vomiting
86. A 47-year-old patient with bilateral pneumonia has a disruption of acid-base balance - compensated gaseous acidosis. What is the most probable mechanism of compensatory adaptation that maintains the patient's acid-base balance?
a. Vomiting
b. Decreased reabsorption of hydrogen carbonate in kidneys
*c. Intensified acidogenesis in kidneys
d. Pulmonary hyperventilation
e. Diarrhea
87. A 48-year-old patient has been intravenously administered prednisolone solution to arrest severe attack of bronchial asthma. What group of hormonal agents does prednisolone belong to?
a. Anabolic steroids
b. Gestagenic drugs
*c. Glucocorticoids
d. Estrogenic drugs
e. Mineralocorticoid
88. A 48-year-old patient has been intravenously administered prednisolone solution to arrest severe attack of bronchial asthma. What group of hormonal agents does prednisolone belong to?
a. Gestagenic drugs
b. Anabolic steroids
c. Estrogenic drugs
*d. Glucocorticoids
e. Mineralocorticoid
89. A 48-year-old patient has been intravenously administered prednisolone solution to arrest severe attack of bronchial asthma. What group of hormonal agents does prednisolone belong to?
a. Gestagenic drugs
b. Mineralocorticoid
c. Anabolic steroids
*d. Glucocorticoids
e. Estrogenic drugs
90. A 5-year-old boy has stomachache, diarrhea with mucus and blood admixtures in the stool, and a fever of 38.0^oC) Bacteriological stool test detected Shigella flexneri. What disease is it?
a. Nonspecific ulcerative colitis
b. Typhoid fever
*c. Dysentery
d. Yersiniosis
e. Salmonellosis
91. A 5-year-old boy has stomachache, diarrhea with mucus and blood admixtures in the stool, and a fever of 38.0^oC) Bacteriological stool test detected Shigella flexneri. What disease is it?
a. Nonspecific ulcerative colitis
b. Yersiniosis
c. Salmonellosis
*d. Dysentery
e. Typhoid fever
92. A 5-year-old boy has stomachache, diarrhea with mucus and blood admixtures in the stool, and a fever of 38.0^oC) Bacteriological stool test detected Shigella flexneri. What disease is it?
a. Typhoid fever
b. Yersiniosis
*c. Dysentery
d. Nonspecific ulcerative colitis
e. Salmonellosis
93. A 5-year-old child after drinking milk often develops the following symptoms: abdominal distension, spastic pain and diarrhea. These symptoms develop after 1-4 hours after single instance of taking milk. What enzymes are deficient, thus, causing the described symptomatology?
a. Maltolytic
*b. Lactolytic
c. Sucrolytic
d. Fructolytic
e. Glucolytic
94. A 5-year-old child after drinking milk often develops the following symptoms: abdominal distension, spastic pain and diarrhea. These symptoms develop after 1-4 hours after single instance of taking milk. What enzymes are deficient, thus, causing the described symptomatology?
a. Maltolytic
b. Glucolytic
*c. Lactolytic
d. Fructolytic
e. Sucrolytic
95. A 5-year-old child after drinking milk often develops the following symptoms: abdominal distension, spastic pain and diarrhea. These symptoms develop after 1-4 hours after single instance of taking milk. What enzymes are deficient, thus, causing the described symptomatology?
a. Sucrolytic
b. Fructolytic
c. Glucolytic
d. Maltolytic
*e. Lactolytic
96. A 5-year-old child presents with abdominal distension, abdominal cramps, and diarrhea occurring 1-4 hours after drinking milk. Described symptoms are caused by the lack of enzymes that break up:
*a. Lactose
b. Fructose
c. Sucrose
d. Maltose
e. Glucose
97. A 5-year-old child presents with abdominal distension, abdominal cramps, and diarrhea occurring 1-4 hours after drinking milk. Described symptoms are caused by the lack of enzymes that break up:
a. Sucrose
*b. Lactose
c. Maltose
d. Fructose
e. Glucose
98. A 5-year-old child presents with abdominal distension, abdominal cramps, and diarrhea occurring 1-4 hours after drinking milk. Described symptoms are caused by the lack of enzymes that break up:
a. Sucrose
b. Glucose
*c. Lactose
d. Fructose
e. Maltose
99. A 50-year-old man with a history of alcoholic cirrhosis complains of dyspeptic disorders and bleeding from hemorrhoidal veins. Examination detects ascites and distended superficial veins of the anterior abdominal wall. What pathology is indicated by these signs?
*a. Portal hypertension
b. Intestinal obstruction
c. Enterocolitis
d. Peptic ulcer disease
e. Hepatitis
100. A 50-year-old man with a history of alcoholic cirrhosis complains of dyspeptic disorders and bleeding from hemorrhoidal veins. Examination detects ascites and distended superficial veins of the anterior abdominal wall. What pathology is indicated by these signs?
a. Intestinal obstruction
b. Hepatitis
*c. Portal hypertension
d. Peptic ulcer disease
e. Enterocolitis
101. A 50-year-old man with a history of alcoholic cirrhosis complains of dyspeptic disorders and bleeding from hemorrhoidal veins. Examination detects ascites and distended superficial veins of the anterior abdominal wall. What pathology is indicated by these signs?
a. Intestinal obstruction
b. Peptic ulcer disease
c. Hepatitis
d. Enterocolitis
*e. Portal hypertension
102. A 52-year-old man complains of sour eructation, heartburn, nausea, epigastric pain, and constipations. What gastric secretion disorder is likely in the patient?
a. Achlorhydria
*b. Hypersecretion and hyperchlorhydria
c. Hyposecretion
d. Hypochlorhydria
e. Achylia
103. A 52-year-old man complains of sour eructation, heartburn, nausea, epigastric pain, and constipations. What gastric secretion disorder is likely in the patient?
a. Achlorhydria
b. Achylia
*c. Hypersecretion and hyperchlorhydria
d. Hyposecretion
e. Hypochlorhydria
104. A 52-year-old man complains of sour eructation, heartburn, nausea, epigastric pain, and constipations. What gastric secretion disorder is likely in the patient?
a. Achlorhydria
b. Achylia
c. Hyposecretion
*d. Hypersecretion and hyperchlorhydria
e. Hypochlorhydria
105. A 54-year-old man has requested a pharmacist's advice on drug prescription. The patient has 4-year-long history of chronic glomerulonephritis and 2-year-long history of persistent hypertension. What substance synthesized in the kidneys has important role in development of arterial hypertension?
a. Catecholamines
*b. Renin
c. Nitric oxide
d. Histamine
e. Aldosterone
106. A 54-year-old man has requested a pharmacist's advice on drug prescription. The patient has 4-year-long history of chronic glomerulonephritis and 2-year-long history of persistent hypertension. What substance synthesized in the kidneys has important role in development of arterial hypertension?
a. Catecholamines
b. Aldosterone
c. Nitric oxide
d. Histamine
*e. Renin
107. A 54-year-old man has requested a pharmacist's advice on drug prescription. The patient has 4-year-long history of chronic glomerulonephritis and 2-year-long history of persistent hypertension. What substance synthesized in the kidneys has important role in development of arterial hypertension?
a. Histamine
b. Catecholamines
*c. Renin
d. Nitric oxide
e. Aldosterone
108. A 55-year-old man came to a doctor with complaints of acute pain in his big toes. Meat and wine are a permanent fixture in his diet. The doctor suspects gout. What substance must be measured in the patient's blood to confirm this diagnosis?
a. Ketone bodies
b. Lactate
*c. Uric acid
d. Urea
e. Bilirubin
109. A 55-year-old man came to a doctor with complaints of acute pain in his big toes. Meat and wine are a permanent fixture in his diet. The doctor suspects gout. What substance must be measured in the patient's blood to confirm this diagnosis?
a. Lactate
b. Ketone bodies
*c. Uric acid
d. Bilirubin
e. Urea
110. A 55-year-old man came to a doctor with complaints of acute pain in his big toes. Meat and wine are a permanent fixture in his diet. The doctor suspects gout. What substance must be measured in the patient's blood to confirm this diagnosis?
a. Lactate
b. Urea
c. Ketone bodies
*d. Uric acid
e. Bilirubin
111. A 55-year-old man suffers from peptic ulcer disease of the stomach. What can be identified as an aggressive factor in this case?
a. Prostaglandin Е
*b. Helicobacter pylory
c. Intestinal mucosal barrier
d. Adequate blood supply to the gastric mucosa
e. Regeneration of the gastric mucosal epithelium
112. A 55-year-old man suffers from peptic ulcer disease of the stomach. What can be identified as an aggressive factor in this case?
a. Regeneration of the gastric mucosal epithelium
b. Adequate blood supply to the gastric mucosa
c. Intestinal mucosal barrier
d. Prostaglandin Е
*e. Helicobacter pylory
113. A 55-year-old man suffers from peptic ulcer disease of the stomach. What can be identified as an aggressive factor in this case?
a. Regeneration of the gastric mucosal epithelium
b. Intestinal mucosal barrier
c. Prostaglandin Е
d. Adequate blood supply to the gastric mucosa
*e. Helicobacter pylory
114. A 55-year-old patient was diagnosed with angina pectoris. A calcium channels blocking agent was prescribed for the treatment. Name this drug:
*a. Amlodipine
b. Atenolol
c. Labetalol
d. Reserpine
e. Octadinum (Guanethidine)
115. A 55-year-old patient was diagnosed with angina pectoris. A calcium channels blocking agent was prescribed for the treatment. Name this drug:
a. Atenolol
*b. Amlodipine
c. Reserpine
d. Octadinum (Guanethidine)
e. Labetalol
116. A 55-year-old patient was diagnosed with angina pectoris. A calcium channels blocking agent was prescribed for the treatment. Name this drug:
a. Labetalol
b. Octadinum (Guanethidine)
c. Reserpine
*d. Amlodipine
e. Atenolol
117. A 56-year-old man with ischemic heart disease was prescribed metoprolol. What is the mechanism of action of beta-blockers in ischemic heart disease?
a. Constriction of the coronary vessels
b. Increase of the myocardial oxygen  demand
c. Dilation of the coronary vessels
d. Reduction of the peripheral vessel tone
*e. Reduction of the myocardial oxygen  demand
118. A 56-year-old man with ischemic heart disease was prescribed metoprolol. What is the mechanism of action of beta-blockers in ischemic heart disease?
a. Constriction of the coronary vessels
b. Reduction of the peripheral vessel tone
c. Increase of the myocardial oxygen  demand
*d. Reduction of the myocardial oxygen  demand
e. Dilation of the coronary vessels
119. A 56-year-old man with ischemic heart disease was prescribed metoprolol. What is the mechanism of action of beta-blockers in ischemic heart disease?
a. Dilation of the coronary vessels
b. Increase of the myocardial oxygen  demand
c. Reduction of the peripheral vessel tone
*d. Reduction of the myocardial oxygen  demand
e. Constriction of the coronary vessels
120. A 58-year-old man presents with a peripheral circulation disorder with a restricted arterial inflow, paleness of the affected area, and decrease of partial oxygen pressure in the affected area. Name this disorder:
a. Arterial hyperemia
b. Venous hyperemia
c. Reperfusion syndrome
*d. Ischemia
e. Thrombosis
121. A 58-year-old man presents with a peripheral circulation disorder with a restricted arterial inflow, paleness of the affected area, and decrease of partial oxygen pressure in the affected area. Name this disorder:
a. Reperfusion syndrome
*b. Ischemia
c. Thrombosis
d. Venous hyperemia
e. Arterial hyperemia
122. A 58-year-old man presents with a peripheral circulation disorder with a restricted arterial inflow, paleness of the affected area, and decrease of partial oxygen pressure in the affected area. Name this disorder:
a. Venous hyperemia
b. Thrombosis
c. Reperfusion syndrome
d. Arterial hyperemia
*e. Ischemia
123. A 60-year-old man has depressive syndrome and glaucoma. Why is antidepressant amitriptyline contraindicated in this case?
*a. It acts as a muscarinic antagonist
b. It acts as an alpha-blocker
c. It is contraindicated for elderly patients
d. It increases blood pressure
e. It acts as a muscarinic agonist
124. A 60-year-old man has depressive syndrome and glaucoma. Why is antidepressant amitriptyline contraindicated in this case?
a. It acts as a muscarinic agonist
b. It is contraindicated for elderly patients
c. It acts as an alpha-blocker
*d. It acts as a muscarinic antagonist
e. It increases blood pressure
125. A 60-year-old man has depressive syndrome and glaucoma. Why is antidepressant amitriptyline contraindicated in this case?
a. It increases blood pressure
*b. It acts as a muscarinic antagonist
c. It acts as a muscarinic agonist
d. It is contraindicated for elderly patients
e. It acts as an alpha-blocker
126. A 60-year-old man with heart failure has received a cardiotonic that is a beta_1 adrenergic agonist. Name this drug:
*a. Dobutamine
b. Papaverine
c. Salbutamol
d. Potassium aspartate and magnesium aspartate
e. Xenical (Orlistat)
127. A 60-year-old man with heart failure has received a cardiotonic that is a beta_1 adrenergic agonist. Name this drug:
*a. Dobutamine
b. Potassium aspartate and magnesium aspartate
c. Papaverine
d. Xenical (Orlistat)
e. Salbutamol
128. A 60-year-old man with heart failure has received a cardiotonic that is a beta_1 adrenergic agonist. Name this drug:
a. Salbutamol
b. Papaverine
*c. Dobutamine
d. Xenical (Orlistat)
e. Potassium aspartate and magnesium aspartate
129. A 62-year-old man was hospitalized into the cardiology department in a severe condition with the diagnosis of acute myocardial infarction in the posterior wall of the left ventricle and septum, pulmonary edema. What is the primary mechanism of pulmonary edema development in this patient?
a. Decreased alveolocapillary oxygen  diffusion
b. Pulmonary venous hypertension
c. Hypoxemia
*d. Acute left ventricular failure
e. Pulmonary arterial hypertension
130. A 62-year-old man was hospitalized into the cardiology department in a severe condition with the diagnosis of acute myocardial infarction in the posterior wall of the left ventricle and septum, pulmonary edema. What is the primary mechanism of pulmonary edema development in this patient?
a. Pulmonary arterial hypertension
*b. Acute left ventricular failure
c. Hypoxemia
d. Decreased alveolocapillary oxygen  diffusion
e. Pulmonary venous hypertension
131. A 62-year-old man was hospitalized into the cardiology department in a severe condition with the diagnosis of acute myocardial infarction in the posterior wall of the left ventricle and septum, pulmonary edema. What is the primary mechanism of pulmonary edema development in this patient?
a. Pulmonary arterial hypertension
b. Hypoxemia
c. Decreased alveolocapillary oxygen  diffusion
*d. Acute left ventricular failure
e. Pulmonary venous hypertension
132. A 62-year-old woman with transmural myocardial infarction has developed heart failure. What is the pathogenetic mechanism of heart failure development in this case?
*a. Decreased mass of functioning cardiomyocytes
b. Myocardial reperfusion injury
c. Pressure overload of the heart
d. Volume overload of the heart
e. Acute cardiac tamponade
133. A 62-year-old woman with transmural myocardial infarction has developed heart failure. What is the pathogenetic mechanism of heart failure development in this case?
a. Acute cardiac tamponade
b. Pressure overload of the heart
c. Volume overload of the heart
*d. Decreased mass of functioning cardiomyocytes
e. Myocardial reperfusion injury
134. A 62-year-old woman with transmural myocardial infarction has developed heart failure. What is the pathogenetic mechanism of heart failure development in this case?
a. Volume overload of the heart
b. Pressure overload of the heart
c. Acute cardiac tamponade
*d. Decreased mass of functioning cardiomyocytes
e. Myocardial reperfusion injury
135. A 65-year-old patient has been diagnosed with prostate adenoma. What adrenoblocker should he be prescribed?
a. Nifedipine
b. Metoprolol
c. Atenolol
d. Propranolol
*e. Doxazosin
136. A 65-year-old patient has been diagnosed with prostate adenoma. What adrenoblocker should he be prescribed?
a. Propranolol
b. Metoprolol
*c. Doxazosin
d. Nifedipine
e. Atenolol
137. A 65-year-old patient has been diagnosed with prostate adenoma. What adrenoblocker should he be prescribed?
a. Propranolol
b. Nifedipine
c. Metoprolol
d. Atenolol
*e. Doxazosin
138. A 70-year-old man came to a doctor with complaints of enlarged hands, feet, tongue, and facial features. Examination reveals a significant increase of somatotropin levels in the patient's blood. What causes this condition in the patient?
*a. Adenohypophyseal hyperfunction
b. Hypothyroidism
c. Hyperfunction of the adrenal cortex
d. Hyperparathyroidism
e. Adenohypophyseal hypofunction
139. A 70-year-old man came to a doctor with complaints of enlarged hands, feet, tongue, and facial features. Examination reveals a significant increase of somatotropin levels in the patient's blood. What causes this condition in the patient?
a. Adenohypophyseal hypofunction
*b. Adenohypophyseal hyperfunction
c. Hyperfunction of the adrenal cortex
d. Hyperparathyroidism
e. Hypothyroidism
140. A 70-year-old man came to a doctor with complaints of enlarged hands, feet, tongue, and facial features. Examination reveals a significant increase of somatotropin levels in the patient's blood. What causes this condition in the patient?
a. Hyperfunction of the adrenal cortex
b. Adenohypophyseal hypofunction
c. Hypothyroidism
d. Hyperparathyroidism
*e. Adenohypophyseal hyperfunction
141. A 70-year-old man with atherosclerosis complains of tinnitus both in the ears and in the head, memory deterioration, loss of working ability, and rapid fatigability. What arteries are the most affected in this man?
a. Coronary arteries
b. Renal arteries
c. Intestinal arteries
d. Lower limb arteries
*e. Cerebral arteries
142. A 70-year-old man with atherosclerosis complains of tinnitus both in the ears and in the head, memory deterioration, loss of working ability, and rapid fatigability. What arteries are the most affected in this man?
a. Intestinal arteries
*b. Cerebral arteries
c. Coronary arteries
d. Lower limb arteries
e. Renal arteries
143. A 70-year-old man with atherosclerosis complains of tinnitus both in the ears and in the head, memory deterioration, loss of working ability, and rapid fatigability. What arteries are the most affected in this man?
a. Intestinal arteries
b. Renal arteries
c. Lower limb arteries
*d. Cerebral arteries
e. Coronary arteries
144. A 71-year-old woman with cholecystitis developed a yellow tint to her skin and mucosa. She was diagnosed with mechanical jaundice. The change in the patient's skin coloring occurred due to elevated levels of the following substance in her blood:
*a. Conjugated bilirubin
b. Unconjugated bilirubin
c. Urobilinogen
d. Bile acids
e. Stercobilinogen
145. A 71-year-old woman with cholecystitis developed a yellow tint to her skin and mucosa. She was diagnosed with mechanical jaundice. The change in the patient's skin coloring occurred due to elevated levels of the following substance in her blood:
a. Stercobilinogen
*b. Conjugated bilirubin
c. Bile acids
d. Urobilinogen
e. Unconjugated bilirubin
146. A 71-year-old woman with cholecystitis developed a yellow tint to her skin and mucosa. She was diagnosed with mechanical jaundice. The change in the patient's skin coloring occurred due to elevated levels of the following substance in her blood:
a. Urobilinogen
b. Unconjugated bilirubin
c. Stercobilinogen
*d. Conjugated bilirubin
e. Bile acids
147. A 71-year-old woman with cholecystitis has developed mechanical jaundice. What type of arrhythmia will develop in this case?
a. Ciliary arrhythmia
b. Sinus tachycardia
*c. Sinus bradycardia
d. Extrasystole
e. Atrioventricular block
148. A 71-year-old woman with cholecystitis has developed mechanical jaundice. What type of arrhythmia will develop in this case?
a. Sinus tachycardia
b. Extrasystole
*c. Sinus bradycardia
d. Ciliary arrhythmia
e. Atrioventricular block
149. A 71-year-old woman with cholecystitis has developed mechanical jaundice. What type of arrhythmia will develop in this case?
a. Sinus tachycardia
b. Extrasystole
c. Atrioventricular block
d. Ciliary arrhythmia
*e. Sinus bradycardia
150. A 77-year-old man complains of shortness of breath, leg edemas, and cardiac pain. He suffers from chronic heart failure. What type of hypoxia is observed in this man?
*a. Circulatory hypoxia
b. Hypoxic hypoxia
c. Respiratory hypoxia
d. Tissue hypoxia
e. Blood hypoxia
151. A 77-year-old man complains of shortness of breath, leg edemas, and cardiac pain. He suffers from chronic heart failure. What type of hypoxia is observed in this man?
a. Respiratory hypoxia
*b. Circulatory hypoxia
c. Hypoxic hypoxia
d. Blood hypoxia
e. Tissue hypoxia
152. A 77-year-old man complains of shortness of breath, leg edemas, and cardiac pain. He suffers from chronic heart failure. What type of hypoxia is observed in this man?
a. Tissue hypoxia
b. Respiratory hypoxia
c. Hypoxic hypoxia
d. Blood hypoxia
*e. Circulatory hypoxia
153. A 9-year-old child due to acute bronchitis developed elevated body temperature up to 38.5^oC that lasted for a week and was then followed by a drop in the temperature down to 37.0^oC) What mechanism is leading at the 3rd stage of fever?
a. Development of chills
b. Increased diuresis
*c. Peripheral vasodilation
d. Increased respiration rate
e. Increased heat production
154. A 9-year-old child due to acute bronchitis developed elevated body temperature up to 38.5^oC that lasted for a week and was then followed by a drop in the temperature down to 37.0^oC) What mechanism is leading at the 3rd stage of fever?
a. Increased respiration rate
b. Development of chills
*c. Peripheral vasodilation
d. Increased heat production
e. Increased diuresis
155. A 9-year-old child due to acute bronchitis developed elevated body temperature up to 38.5^oC that lasted for a week and was then followed by a drop in the temperature down to 37.0^oC) What mechanism is leading at the 3rd stage of fever?
a. Increased respiration rate
b. Increased heat production
c. Development of chills
d. Increased diuresis
*e. Peripheral vasodilation
156. A Gram stained smear shows large oval violet cells that form pseudomycelium. Name these microorganisms:
a. Penicillium fungi
b. Mucor fungi
c. Actinomycetales
d. Plasmodium vivax
*e. Candida fungi
157. A Gram stained smear shows large oval violet cells that form pseudomycelium. Name these microorganisms:
a. Penicillium fungi
b. Mucor fungi
c. Plasmodium vivax
d. Actinomycetales
*e. Candida fungi
158. A Gram stained smear shows large oval violet cells that form pseudomycelium. Name these microorganisms:
a. Plasmodium vivax
b. Actinomycetales
*c. Candida fungi
d. Mucor fungi
e. Penicillium fungi
159. A Poaceae plant has linear leaves with several non-branching veins that are parallel to the edge of the lamina, which indicates the following type of leaf venation:
a. Arcuate
b. Dichotomous
c. Pinnate
*d. Parallel
e. Palmate
160. A Poaceae plant has linear leaves with several non-branching veins that are parallel to the edge of the lamina, which indicates the following type of leaf venation:
a. Pinnate
b. Arcuate
*c. Parallel
d. Dichotomous
e. Palmate
161. A Polygonaceae family plant has elongated lanceolate leaves with ochreae and brown spots on the upper surface of the leaf blade. These features are characteristic of:
a. Hypericum perforatum
b. Polygonum aviculare
c. Polygonum hydropiper
*d. Polygonum persicaria
e. Leonurus quinquelobatus
162. A Polygonaceae family plant has elongated lanceolate leaves with ochreae and brown spots on the upper surface of the leaf blade. These features are characteristic of:
a. Leonurus quinquelobatus
*b. Polygonum persicaria
c. Polygonum hydropiper
d. Polygonum aviculare
e. Hypericum perforatum
163. A Polygonaceae family plant has elongated lanceolate leaves with ochreae and brown spots on the upper surface of the leaf blade. These features are characteristic of:
a. Polygonum hydropiper
b. Hypericum perforatum
c. Polygonum aviculare
*d. Polygonum persicaria
e. Leonurus quinquelobatus
164. A bacillus was obtained from the patient's feces. The bacillus is comma-shaped, mobile, non-spore-forming, and has no capsule. On the solid alkaline medium it grows transparent colonies, on the alkaline peptone water it produces pale blue film in 6 hours. What causative agent can be suspected?
a. Proteus
*b. Cholera vibrio
c. Shigella
d. Escherichia
e. Salmonella
165. A bacillus was obtained from the patient's feces. The bacillus is comma-shaped, mobile, non-spore-forming, and has no capsule. On the solid alkaline medium it grows transparent colonies, on the alkaline peptone water it produces pale blue film in 6 hours. What causative agent can be suspected?
a. Salmonella
b. Shigella
c. Proteus
d. Escherichia
*e. Cholera vibrio
166. A bacillus was obtained from the patient's feces. The bacillus is comma-shaped, mobile, non-spore-forming, and has no capsule. On the solid alkaline medium it grows transparent colonies, on the alkaline peptone water it produces pale blue film in 6 hours. What causative agent can be suspected?
a. Shigella
*b. Cholera vibrio
c. Salmonella
d. Proteus
e. Escherichia
167. A bulbous plant with specific odor has basal leaf arrangement; the leaves are cylindrical and fistulose. Its peduncle bears a simple umbel inflorescence with membranous indusium. Its fruit is a capsule. These features of the plant indicate that it belongs to the following species:
a. Acorus calamus
b. Convallaria majalis
c. Allium sativum
*d. Allium cepa
e. Agropyron repens
168. A bulbous plant with specific odor has basal leaf arrangement; the leaves are cylindrical and fistulose. Its peduncle bears a simple umbel inflorescence with membranous indusium. Its fruit is a capsule. These features of the plant indicate that it belongs to the following species:
a. Allium sativum
*b. Allium cepa
c. Agropyron repens
d. Acorus calamus
e. Convallaria majalis
169. A bulbous plant with specific odor has basal leaf arrangement; the leaves are cylindrical and fistulose. Its peduncle bears a simple umbel inflorescence with membranous indusium. Its fruit is a capsule. These features of the plant indicate that it belongs to the following species:
a. Convallaria majalis
b. Allium sativum
c. Agropyron repens
d. Acorus calamus
*e. Allium cepa
170. A case of hepatitis A was registered at a school. What drug should be used for specific prevention in the children, who were in a contact with the sick classmate?
a. Inactivated vaccine
b. Interferon
*c. Immunoglobulin
d. Live vaccine
e. Ribavirin
171. A case of hepatitis A was registered at a school. What drug should be used for specific prevention in the children, who were in a contact with the sick classmate?
a. Live vaccine
*b. Immunoglobulin
c. Inactivated vaccine
d. Ribavirin
e. Interferon
172. A case of hepatitis A was registered at a school. What drug should be used for specific prevention in the children, who were in a contact with the sick classmate?
a. Ribavirin
b. Inactivated vaccine
c. Interferon
d. Live vaccine
*e. Immunoglobulin
173. A certain dioecious plant commonly grows at the forest edge. It is a shrub with thorned sprouts. Its fruit is a round black coenocarpous drupe (pyrenarium) with 3-4 seeds. Name this plant:
*a. Rhamnus cathartica
b. Crataegus sanguinea
c. Rosa canina
d. Hippophae rhamnoides
e. Sambucus nigra
174. A certain dioecious plant commonly grows at the forest edge. It is a shrub with thorned sprouts. Its fruit is a round black coenocarpous drupe (pyrenarium) with 3-4 seeds. Name this plant:
*a. Rhamnus cathartica
b. Sambucus nigra
c. Crataegus sanguinea
d. Hippophae rhamnoides
e. Rosa canina
175. A certain dioecious plant commonly grows at the forest edge. It is a shrub with thorned sprouts. Its fruit is a round black coenocarpous drupe (pyrenarium) with 3-4 seeds. Name this plant:
a. Crataegus sanguinea
b. Hippophae rhamnoides
c. Rosa canina
*d. Rhamnus cathartica
e. Sambucus nigra
176. A certain drug is a first-line antituberculosis agent. Its possible side effects include polyneuritis, hepatotoxicity, mental disorders, and allergic reactions. Name this drug.
a. Atropine
b. Clotrimazole
*c. Isoniazid
d. Meloxicam
e. Adrenaline hydrochloride
177. A certain drug is a first-line antituberculosis agent. Its possible side effects include polyneuritis, hepatotoxicity, mental disorders, and allergic reactions. Name this drug.
a. Clotrimazole
*b. Isoniazid
c. Adrenaline hydrochloride
d. Meloxicam
e. Atropine
178. A certain drug is a first-line antituberculosis agent. Its possible side effects include polyneuritis, hepatotoxicity, mental disorders, and allergic reactions. Name this drug.
a. Clotrimazole
b. Adrenaline hydrochloride
*c. Isoniazid
d. Atropine
e. Meloxicam
179. A certain herbaceous plant grows on the meadows of the Carpathian Mountains. It has orange anthodium inflorescences, upright stem, and a rosette of basal leaves. Name this plant:
*a. Arnica montana
b. Calendula officinalis
c. Echinacea purpurea
d. Cychorium intybus
e. Centaurea cyanus
180. A certain herbaceous plant grows on the meadows of the Carpathian Mountains. It has orange anthodium inflorescences, upright stem, and a rosette of basal leaves. Name this plant:
a. Cychorium intybus
b. Calendula officinalis
c. Centaurea cyanus
d. Echinacea purpurea
*e. Arnica montana
181. A certain herbaceous plant grows on the meadows of the Carpathian Mountains. It has orange anthodium inflorescences, upright stem, and a rosette of basal leaves. Name this plant:
a. Echinacea purpurea
b. Centaurea cyanus
c. Calendula officinalis
*d. Arnica montana
e. Cychorium intybus
182. A certain infection leads to fetus malformation if a pregnant woman is affected. What vaccine should be used for prevention of this infection?
*a. Rubella virus vaccine
b. Poliovirus vaccine
c. Mumps vaccine
d. Antirabic vaccine
e. Influenza virus vaccine
183. A certain infection leads to fetus malformation if a pregnant woman is affected. What vaccine should be used for prevention of this infection?
a. Antirabic vaccine
b. Influenza virus vaccine
c. Poliovirus vaccine
d. Mumps vaccine
*e. Rubella virus vaccine
184. A certain infection leads to fetus malformation if a pregnant woman is affected. What vaccine should be used for prevention of this infection?
a. Antirabic vaccine
b. Poliovirus vaccine
*c. Rubella virus vaccine
d. Mumps vaccine
e. Influenza virus vaccine
185. A certain meristematic tissue is located in the vascular bundles of the stem between the secondary phloem and the secondary xylem. What type of meristematic tissue is it?
a. Dermatogen
*b. Cambium
c. Pericycle
d. Procambium
e. Phellogen
186. A certain meristematic tissue is located in the vascular bundles of the stem between the secondary phloem and the secondary xylem. What type of meristematic tissue is it?
a. Dermatogen
*b. Cambium
c. Procambium
d. Phellogen
e. Pericycle
187. A certain meristematic tissue is located in the vascular bundles of the stem between the secondary phloem and the secondary xylem. What type of meristematic tissue is it?
a. Pericycle
b. Phellogen
*c. Cambium
d. Procambium
e. Dermatogen
188. A certain part of the primary structure of a root has cells with Casparian strips, impregnated with suberin. What tissue of the primary structure of a root contains these cells?
a. Epiblem
b. Mesodermis
*c. Endodermis
d. Pericycle
e. Exodermis
189. A certain part of the primary structure of a root has cells with Casparian strips, impregnated with suberin. What tissue of the primary structure of a root contains these cells?
a. Mesodermis
b. Pericycle
*c. Endodermis
d. Exodermis
e. Epiblem
190. A certain part of the primary structure of a root has cells with Casparian strips, impregnated with suberin. What tissue of the primary structure of a root contains these cells?
a. Pericycle
b. Mesodermis
*c. Endodermis
d. Exodermis
e. Epiblem
191. A certain perennial alkaloid-containing plant is widely used in medicine. It has the following features: pinnately dissected leaves with light green upper surface and bluish lower surface; regular bisexual flowers with double perianth, attached to long peduncles, located in the axils of narrow sharp bracts, and clustered together in umbel inflorescences; the fruit is a siliquiform capsule; the plant produces an orange milky sap. These biological features are characteristic of:
a. Atropa belladonna
*b. Chelidonium majus
c. Vinca minor
d. Papaver somniferum
e. Datura stramonium
192. A certain perennial alkaloid-containing plant is widely used in medicine. It has the following features: pinnately dissected leaves with light green upper surface and bluish lower surface; regular bisexual flowers with double perianth, attached to long peduncles, located in the axils of narrow sharp bracts, and clustered together in umbel inflorescences; the fruit is a siliquiform capsule; the plant produces an orange milky sap. These biological features are characteristic of:
a. Papaver somniferum
b. Atropa belladonna
c. Vinca minor
d. Datura stramonium
*e. Chelidonium majus
193. A certain perennial alkaloid-containing plant is widely used in medicine. It has the following features: pinnately dissected leaves with light green upper surface and bluish lower surface; regular bisexual flowers with double perianth, attached to long peduncles, located in the axils of narrow sharp bracts, and clustered together in umbel inflorescences; the fruit is a siliquiform capsule; the plant produces an orange milky sap. These biological features are characteristic of:
a. Papaver somniferum
b. Vinca minor
c. Atropa belladonna
*d. Chelidonium majus
e. Datura stramonium
194. A certain reaction is successfully used for rapid diagnostics of many bacterial, viral, protozoal, and fungal diseases, as well as for detection of pathogens in the environment, food, and water. This reaction is based on the principle of repeated copying of a specific DNA segment or a single gene, using the DNA polymerase enzyme. Name this reaction:
a. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
b. Radioimmunoassay
*c. Polymerase chain reaction
d. Immunofluorescence reaction
e. Enzyme-marked antibody reaction
195. A certain reaction is successfully used for rapid diagnostics of many bacterial, viral, protozoal, and fungal diseases, as well as for detection of pathogens in the environment, food, and water. This reaction is based on the principle of repeated copying of a specific DNA segment or a single gene, using the DNA polymerase enzyme. Name this reaction:
a. Enzyme-marked antibody reaction
b. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
c. Radioimmunoassay
*d. Polymerase chain reaction
e. Immunofluorescence reaction
196. A certain reaction is successfully used for rapid diagnostics of many bacterial, viral, protozoal, and fungal diseases, as well as for detection of pathogens in the environment, food, and water. This reaction is based on the principle of repeated copying of a specific DNA segment or a single gene, using the DNA polymerase enzyme. Name this reaction:
a. Immunofluorescence reaction
b. Enzyme-marked antibody reaction
c. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
d. Radioimmunoassay
*e. Polymerase chain reaction
197. A characteristic reaction between sodium sulfide and the salts of an unknown cation has produced a white precipitate. What cation was it?
a. Lead
b. Mercury
*c. Zinc
d. Magnesium
e. Copper
198. A characteristic reaction between sodium sulfide and the salts of an unknown cation has produced a white precipitate. What cation was it?
a. Magnesium
b. Lead
c. Copper
d. Mercury
*e. Zinc
199. A characteristic reaction between sodium sulfide and the salts of an unknown cation has produced a white precipitate. What cation was it?
a. Mercury
b. Magnesium
*c. Zinc
d. Copper
e. Lead
200. A chemical analytical laboratory uses a reaction with dimethylglyoxime to identify nickel cations. What will be the color of the precipitate that forms as a result of this reaction?
a. Blue
b. Green
*c. Red
d. White
e. Yellow
201. A chemical analytical laboratory uses a reaction with dimethylglyoxime to identify nickel cations. What will be the color of the precipitate that forms as a result of this reaction?
a. Green
b. Yellow
*c. Red
d. Blue
e. White
202. A chemical analytical laboratory uses a reaction with dimethylglyoxime to identify nickel cations. What will be the color of the precipitate that forms as a result of this reaction?
a. White
b. Green
c. Yellow
*d. Red
e. Blue
203. A chemist-analyst must determine the quantitative content of hydrochloric acid in a mixture that contains nitric acid. What titrimetric method of analysis can be used for this purpose?
*a. Argentometry
b. Complexonometry
c. Iodometry
d. Acid-base titration
e. Permanganatometry
204. A chemist-analyst must determine the quantitative content of hydrochloric acid in a mixture that contains nitric acid. What titrimetric method of analysis can be used for this purpose?
a. Permanganatometry
b. Iodometry
c. Acid-base titration
*d. Argentometry
e. Complexonometry
205. A chemist-analyst must determine the quantitative content of hydrochloric acid in a mixture that contains nitric acid. What titrimetric method of analysis can be used for this purpose?
a. Permanganatometry
b. Iodometry
c. Acid-base titration
d. Complexonometry
*e. Argentometry
206. A chemist-analyst performs a qualitative analysis of group IV cations. Why is a 3% hydrogen peroxide solution added in the process?
*a. Conversion of ions to a higher degree  of oxidation
b. Formation of colored compounds
c. Conversion of ions to a lower degree of oxidation
d. Sediment formation
e. Gas removal
207. A chemist-analyst performs a qualitative analysis of group IV cations. Why is a 3% hydrogen peroxide solution added in the process?
a. Formation of colored compounds
b. Conversion of ions to a lower degree of oxidation
c. Sediment formation
*d. Conversion of ions to a higher degree  of oxidation
e. Gas removal
208. A chemist-analyst performs a qualitative analysis of group IV cations. Why is a 3% hydrogen peroxide solution added in the process?
a. Sediment formation
b. Conversion of ions to a lower degree of oxidation
c. Formation of colored compounds
d. Gas removal
*e. Conversion of ions to a higher degree  of oxidation
209. A chemotherapeutic agent has bactericidal effect against streptococci, staphylococci, bacilli, and clostridia. According to its action spectrum this drug belongs to the following group:
a. Antiviral agents
*b. Broad spectrum antibacterial agents
c. Broad spectrum antifungal agents
d. Narrow spectrum antibacterial agents
e. Antituberculous agents
210. A chemotherapeutic agent has bactericidal effect against streptococci, staphylococci, bacilli, and clostridia. According to its action spectrum this drug belongs to the following group:
a. Broad spectrum antifungal agents
*b. Broad spectrum antibacterial agents
c. Antituberculous agents
d. Narrow spectrum antibacterial agents
e. Antiviral agents
211. A chemotherapeutic agent has bactericidal effect against streptococci, staphylococci, bacilli, and clostridia. According to its action spectrum this drug belongs to the following group:
a. Broad spectrum antifungal agents
b. Narrow spectrum antibacterial agents
c. Antituberculous agents
d. Antiviral agents
*e. Broad spectrum antibacterial agents
212. A child diagnosed with rheumatism was hospitalized. What microorganisms cause this disease?
*a. Streptococci
b. Staphylococci
c. Meningococci
d. Enterococci
e. Pneumococci
213. A child diagnosed with rheumatism was hospitalized. What microorganisms cause this disease?
a. Enterococci
*b. Streptococci
c. Staphylococci
d. Meningococci
e. Pneumococci
214. A child diagnosed with rheumatism was hospitalized. What microorganisms cause this disease?
a. Staphylococci
b. Pneumococci
*c. Streptococci
d. Meningococci
e. Enterococci
215. A child had been administered antidiphtheric serum. What resistance was formed in the child?
a. Active
b. Physiological
c. Primary
d. Pathological
*e. Passive
216. A child had been administered antidiphtheric serum. What resistance was formed in the child?
a. Pathological
b. Active
*c. Passive
d. Physiological
e. Primary
217. A child had been administered antidiphtheric serum. What resistance was formed in the child?
a. Pathological
b. Primary
c. Active
*d. Passive
e. Physiological
218. A child has been hospitalised with scalded skin syndrome. Staphylococcus aureus was detected in blisters. What virulence factor causes exfoliation and necrosis of epidermis?
*a. Exfoliative toxin
b. Hemolysin
c. Enterotoxin
d. Hyaluronidase
e. Toxic shock syndrome toxin
219. A child has been hospitalised with scalded skin syndrome. Staphylococcus aureus was detected in blisters. What virulence factor causes exfoliation and necrosis of epidermis?
a. Enterotoxin
b. Hemolysin
c. Toxic shock syndrome toxin
d. Hyaluronidase
*e. Exfoliative toxin
220. A child has been hospitalised with scalded skin syndrome. Staphylococcus aureus was detected in blisters. What virulence factor causes exfoliation and necrosis of epidermis?
a. Toxic shock syndrome toxin
b. Enterotoxin
c. Hyaluronidase
*d. Exfoliative toxin
e. Hemolysin
221. A child presents with increased nervous excitability, spontaneous tetany attacks, dry skin, brittle nails and hair, and subcutaneous calcifications in the area of the auricles. What hormone is deficient in this case, causing the described changes?
*a. Parathyroid hormone
b. Progesterone
c. Oxytocin
d. Vasopressin
e. Thyroid hormones
222. A child presents with increased nervous excitability, spontaneous tetany attacks, dry skin, brittle nails and hair, and subcutaneous calcifications in the area of the auricles. What hormone is deficient in this case, causing the described changes?
a. Thyroid hormones
b. Progesterone
c. Oxytocin
d. Vasopressin
*e. Parathyroid hormone
223. A child presents with increased nervous excitability, spontaneous tetany attacks, dry skin, brittle nails and hair, and subcutaneous calcifications in the area of the auricles. What hormone is deficient in this case, causing the described changes?
a. Vasopressin
b. Progesterone
c. Thyroid hormones
d. Oxytocin
*e. Parathyroid hormone
224. A child that attends a day care center fell ill with measles. What is used to prevent this disease in the contact persons?
a. Measles vaccine
b. Immunostimulants
c. Sulfanilamides
*d. Measles immunoglobulin
e. Antibiotics
225. A child that attends a day care center fell ill with measles. What is used to prevent this disease in the contact persons?
a. Sulfanilamides
*b. Measles immunoglobulin
c. Measles vaccine
d. Immunostimulants
e. Antibiotics
226. A child that attends a day care center fell ill with measles. What is used to prevent this disease in the contact persons?
a. Sulfanilamides
b. Measles vaccine
c. Immunostimulants
d. Antibiotics
*e. Measles immunoglobulin
227. A child with mental retardation is diagnosed with cretinism. What hormone deficiency is the main factor in the development of nervous system dysfunction in this disease?
a. Catecholamines
b. Estrogens
c. Androgens
d. Glucocorticoids
*e. Thyroid hormones
228. A child with mental retardation is diagnosed with cretinism. What hormone deficiency is the main factor in the development of nervous system dysfunction in this disease?
a. Glucocorticoids
b. Androgens
c. Catecholamines
d. Estrogens
*e. Thyroid hormones
229. A child with mental retardation is diagnosed with cretinism. What hormone deficiency is the main factor in the development of nervous system dysfunction in this disease?
a. Glucocorticoids
b. Catecholamines
*c. Thyroid hormones
d. Estrogens
e. Androgens
230. A colloidal solution emits a matte glow, when light passes through it, due to the light scattering on the colloidal particles as a result of diffraction. Name this physical phenomenon:
a. Coagulation
b. Syneresis
c. Sedimentation
*d. Opalescence
e. Intramolecular diffraction
231. A colloidal solution emits a matte glow, when light passes through it, due to the light scattering on the colloidal particles as a result of diffraction. Name this physical phenomenon:
a. Intramolecular diffraction
*b. Opalescence
c. Sedimentation
d. Coagulation
e. Syneresis
232. A colloidal solution emits a matte glow, when light passes through it, due to the light scattering on the colloidal particles as a result of diffraction. Name this physical phenomenon:
a. Sedimentation
b. Intramolecular diffraction
*c. Opalescence
d. Coagulation
e. Syneresis
233. A colloidal system can be purified using filtration under excess pressure through a semipermeable membrane. Name this purification method.
a. Dialysis
b. Diffusion
*c. Ultrafiltration
d. Filtration
e. Electrodialysis
234. A colloidal system can be purified using filtration under excess pressure through a semipermeable membrane. Name this purification method.
a. Diffusion
b. Dialysis
c. Filtration
*d. Ultrafiltration
e. Electrodialysis
235. A colloidal system can be purified using filtration under excess pressure through a semipermeable membrane. Name this purification method.
a. Filtration
b. Dialysis
c. Diffusion
*d. Ultrafiltration
e. Electrodialysis
236. A diagnostic feature important for correct identification of pine species is the number of needles on the short shoots (brachyblasts). Pinus sylvestris has the following number of needles on its short shoots:
a. 8
*b. 2
c. 3
d. Many
e. 5
237. A diagnostic feature important for correct identification of pine species is the number of needles on the short shoots (brachyblasts). Pinus sylvestris has the following number of needles on its short shoots:
a. 8
b. 3
c. 5
*d. 2
e. Many
238. A diagnostic feature important for correct identification of pine species is the number of needles on the short shoots (brachyblasts). Pinus sylvestris has the following number of needles on its short shoots:
a. 8
b. Many
c. 3
*d. 2
e. 5
239. A diagnostic features of which family is the presence of giants or a flower tube?
a. Beech trees
b. Solanaceae
*c. Rose
d. Celery
e. Heather
240. A diagnostic features of which family is the presence of giants or a flower tube?
a. Heather
*b. Rose
c. Solanaceae
d. Celery
e. Beech trees
241. A diagnostic features of which family is the presence of giants or a flower tube?
a. Heather
b. Celery
c. Beech trees
d. Solanaceae
*e. Rose
242. A dispensing chemist performs identification of pharmaceutical substance using ultraviolet spectrophotometry. The specialist obtains the graph of optical density to wavelength ratio, which is called:
a. Calibration curve
b. Emission spectrum
*c. Light absorbtion curve
d. Titration curve
e. Logarithmic curve
243. A dispensing chemist performs identification of pharmaceutical substance using ultraviolet spectrophotometry. The specialist obtains the graph of optical density to wavelength ratio, which is called:
a. Titration curve
b. Calibration curve
*c. Light absorbtion curve
d. Logarithmic curve
e. Emission spectrum
244. A dispensing chemist performs identification of pharmaceutical substance using ultraviolet spectrophotometry. The specialist obtains the graph of optical density to wavelength ratio, which is called:
a. Titration curve
b. Logarithmic curve
c. Calibration curve
*d. Light absorbtion curve
e. Emission spectrum
245. A dissected flower has numerous stamens that are united by the stamen filaments into several bundles. What is this type of androecium?
*a. Polyadelphous
b. Didynamous
c. Monadelphous
d. Diadelphous
e. Tetradynamous
246. A dissected flower has numerous stamens that are united by the stamen filaments into several bundles. What is this type of androecium?
a. Didynamous
b. Diadelphous
*c. Polyadelphous
d. Monadelphous
e. Tetradynamous
247. A dithizone solution was added into the studied alkaline solution of cations that belong to the IV analytical group. As a result, a compound formed that was coloring not only the organic but also the aqueous phase in red. What cations are present in the solution, as indicated by this analytical effect?
a. Al^3+
*b. Zn^2+
c. Сr^3+
d. Fe^3+
e. Bi^3+
248. A dithizone solution was added into the studied alkaline solution of cations that belong to the IV analytical group. As a result, a compound formed that was coloring not only the organic but also the aqueous phase in red. What cations are present in the solution, as indicated by this analytical effect?
a. Al^3+
b. Сr^3+
*c. Zn^2+
d. Bi^3+
e. Fe^3+
249. A dithizone solution was added into the studied alkaline solution of cations that belong to the IV analytical group. As a result, a compound formed that was coloring not only the organic but also the aqueous phase in red. What cations are present in the solution, as indicated by this analytical effect?
a. Fe^3+
b. Сr^3+
c. Bi^3+
d. Al^3+
*e. Zn^2+
250. A diuretic should be prescribed for treatment of cerebral edema. What drug is to be administered?
*a. Furosemide
b. Caffeine and sodium benzoate
c. Spironolactone
d. Diacarb (Acetazolamide)
e. Hydrochlorothiazide
251. A diuretic should be prescribed for treatment of cerebral edema. What drug is to be administered?
*a. Furosemide
b. Diacarb (Acetazolamide)
c. Caffeine and sodium benzoate
d. Spironolactone
e. Hydrochlorothiazide
252. A diuretic should be prescribed for treatment of cerebral edema. What drug is to be administered?
a. Hydrochlorothiazide
b. Diacarb (Acetazolamide)
c. Spironolactone
*d. Furosemide
e. Caffeine and sodium benzoate
253. A doctor has prescribed a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug to relieve inflammation and pain syndrome. Name this drug:
a. Calcium chloride
b. Prednisolone
c. Loratadine
*d. Diclofenac sodium
e. Glibenclamide
254. A doctor has prescribed a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug to relieve inflammation and pain syndrome. Name this drug:
a. Glibenclamide
*b. Diclofenac sodium
c. Loratadine
d. Calcium chloride
e. Prednisolone
255. A doctor has prescribed a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug to relieve inflammation and pain syndrome. Name this drug:
a. Loratadine
b. Calcium chloride
c. Glibenclamide
*d. Diclofenac sodium
e. Prednisolone
256. A doctor has prescribed an adrenocortical hormone drug for a patient with bronchial asthma. Specify this drug.
*a. Prednisolone
b. Atropine sulfate
c. Loratadine
d. Diclofenac sodium
e. Salbutamol
257. A doctor has prescribed an adrenocortical hormone drug for a patient with bronchial asthma. Specify this drug.
*a. Prednisolone
b. Loratadine
c. Salbutamol
d. Atropine sulfate
e. Diclofenac sodium
258. A doctor has prescribed an adrenocortical hormone drug for a patient with bronchial asthma. Specify this drug.
a. Atropine sulfate
*b. Prednisolone
c. Salbutamol
d. Diclofenac sodium
e. Loratadine
259. A doctor has prescribed metoprolol to a person with essential hypertension. As a result of abrupt cessation of treatment, the patient's blood pressure increased. What pathological condition did the patient develop?
*a. Withdrawal syndrome
b. Idiosyncrasy
c. Allergic reaction
d. Drug allergy
e. Pharmacotoxic response
260. A doctor has prescribed metoprolol to a person with essential hypertension. As a result of abrupt cessation of treatment, the patient's blood pressure increased. What pathological condition did the patient develop?
a. Allergic reaction
b. Idiosyncrasy
c. Pharmacotoxic response
*d. Withdrawal syndrome
e. Drug allergy
261. A doctor has prescribed metoprolol to a person with essential hypertension. As a result of abrupt cessation of treatment, the patient's blood pressure increased. What pathological condition did the patient develop?
a. Idiosyncrasy
b. Pharmacotoxic response
c. Drug allergy
d. Allergic reaction
*e. Withdrawal syndrome
262. A doctor has prescribed the patient a dopamine precursor for treatment of Parkinson's disease. After administration of this drug, the patient's mobility and mental processes improved and the ability to concentrate was restored. The maximum effect was observed after a month of treatment. Name this drug:
a. Cyclodol (Trihexyphenidyl)
b. Midantan (Amantadine)
c. Selegiline
d. Bromocriptine
*e. Levodopa
263. A doctor has prescribed the patient a dopamine precursor for treatment of Parkinson's disease. After administration of this drug, the patient's mobility and mental processes improved and the ability to concentrate was restored. The maximum effect was observed after a month of treatment. Name this drug:
a. Midantan (Amantadine)
b. Cyclodol (Trihexyphenidyl)
c. Selegiline
*d. Levodopa
e. Bromocriptine
264. A doctor has prescribed the patient a dopamine precursor for treatment of Parkinson's disease. After administration of this drug, the patient's mobility and mental processes improved and the ability to concentrate was restored. The maximum effect was observed after a month of treatment. Name this drug:
a. Midantan (Amantadine)
b. Selegiline
c. Cyclodol (Trihexyphenidyl)
d. Bromocriptine
*e. Levodopa
265. A doctor needs to prescribe the patient a drug for replacement therapy after thyreoidectomy. What drug would you recommend?
a. Thiamazole
*b. L-thyroxine
c. Prednisolone
d. Parathyroidin
e. Insulin
266. A doctor needs to prescribe the patient a drug for replacement therapy after thyreoidectomy. What drug would you recommend?
a. Thiamazole
b. Parathyroidin
c. Insulin
*d. L-thyroxine
e. Prednisolone
267. A doctor needs to prescribe the patient a drug for replacement therapy after thyreoidectomy. What drug would you recommend?
a. Thiamazole
b. Prednisolone
c. Insulin
d. Parathyroidin
*e. L-thyroxine
268. A doctor prescribed diazepam to a patient with anxiety disorders. What pharmacological effect of the drug is the cause of such a prescription?
a. Antianginal
*b. Anxiolytic
c. Anticonvulsant
d. Anti-inflammatory
e. Hypotensive
269. A doctor prescribed diazepam to a patient with anxiety disorders. What pharmacological effect of the drug is the cause of such a prescription?
a. Hypotensive
b. Anticonvulsant
c. Anti-inflammatory
d. Antianginal
*e. Anxiolytic
270. A doctor prescribed metoprolol to a patient, which helped to lower the patient's blood pressure. This drug belongs to the following pharmacological group:
*a. Beta-blockers
b. Sympatholytics
c. Nicotinic antagonists
d. Alpha-blockers
e. Muscarinic antagonists
271. A doctor prescribed metoprolol to a patient, which helped to lower the patient's blood pressure. This drug belongs to the following pharmacological group:
a. Alpha-blockers
b. Sympatholytics
c. Nicotinic antagonists
d. Muscarinic antagonists
*e. Beta-blockers
272. A doctor prescribed metoprolol to a patient, which helped to lower the patient's blood pressure. This drug belongs to the following pharmacological group:
a. Muscarinic antagonists
b. Alpha-blockers
c. Nicotinic antagonists
d. Sympatholytics
*e. Beta-blockers
273. A doctor prescribed nitrazepam to a patient complaining of insomnia. This drug has a hypnotic effect, because it interacts with certain receptors. Name these receptors.
a. Adrenoceptors
b. Histamine receptors
c. Cholinergic receptors
*d. Benzodiazepine receptors
e. Serotonin receptors
274. A doctor prescribed nitrazepam to a patient complaining of insomnia. This drug has a hypnotic effect, because it interacts with certain receptors. Name these receptors.
a. Serotonin receptors
b. Adrenoceptors
c. Histamine receptors
d. Cholinergic receptors
*e. Benzodiazepine receptors
275. A doctor prescribed nitrazepam to a patient complaining of insomnia. This drug has a hypnotic effect, because it interacts with certain receptors. Name these receptors.
a. Serotonin receptors
b. Cholinergic receptors
c. Adrenoceptors
d. Histamine receptors
*e. Benzodiazepine receptors
276. A drug solution sterilized by means of boiling was tested for sterility. Inoculation on Kitt-Tarozzi medium revealed clostridia. Clostridia survived the boiling because they are:
*a. Spore-formers
b. Anaerobic
c. Acid-fast
d. Prototrophic
e. Thermophilic
277. A drug solution sterilized by means of boiling was tested for sterility. Inoculation on Kitt-Tarozzi medium revealed clostridia. Clostridia survived the boiling because they are:
*a. Spore-formers
b. Thermophilic
c. Prototrophic
d. Acid-fast
e. Anaerobic
278. A drug solution sterilized by means of boiling was tested for sterility. Inoculation on Kitt-Tarozzi medium revealed clostridia. Clostridia survived the boiling because they are:
a. Prototrophic
b. Anaerobic
c. Acid-fast
*d. Spore-formers
e. Thermophilic
279. A factory that produces biopreparations adds a 0.3--0.4% formalin solution to a bacterial exotoxin. After that, in 3--4 weeks, a medicine is obtained. This medicine is used for specific disease prevention. What vaccines are made this way?
a. Genetically engineered vaccines
*b. Anatoxin vaccines
c. Chemical vaccines
d. Inactivated vaccines
e. Live vaccines
280. A factory that produces biopreparations adds a 0.3--0.4% formalin solution to a bacterial exotoxin. After that, in 3--4 weeks, a medicine is obtained. This medicine is used for specific disease prevention. What vaccines are made this way?
a. Genetically engineered vaccines
b. Chemical vaccines
c. Inactivated vaccines
d. Live vaccines
*e. Anatoxin vaccines
281. A factory that produces biopreparations adds a 0.3--0.4% formalin solution to a bacterial exotoxin. After that, in 3--4 weeks, a medicine is obtained. This medicine is used for specific disease prevention. What vaccines are made this way?
a. Inactivated vaccines
*b. Anatoxin vaccines
c. Chemical vaccines
d. Genetically engineered vaccines
e. Live vaccines
282. A female patient asked a pharmacist to recommend her a drug for headache with antiplatelet effect. Specify this drug:
*a. Acetylsalicylic acid
b. Promedol
c. Tramadol
d. Codeine phosphate
e. Fentanyl
283. A female patient asked a pharmacist to recommend her a drug for headache with antiplatelet effect. Specify this drug:
a. Codeine phosphate
*b. Acetylsalicylic acid
c. Tramadol
d. Fentanyl
e. Promedol
284. A female patient asked a pharmacist to recommend her a drug for headache with antiplatelet effect. Specify this drug:
a. Fentanyl
*b. Acetylsalicylic acid
c. Tramadol
d. Codeine phosphate
e. Promedol
285. A female patient was prescribed loratadine to treat her allergic dermatitis caused by bee sting. What is the mechanism of the drug's antiallergic action?
*a. Inhibition of histamine H1 receptors
b. Antiserotonin activity
c. Block of leukotriene D4 receptors
d. Decrease of leukotriene release
e. Inhibition of histamine H2 receptors
286. A female patient was prescribed loratadine to treat her allergic dermatitis caused by bee sting. What is the mechanism of the drug's antiallergic action?
a. Antiserotonin activity
b. Block of leukotriene D4 receptors
c. Inhibition of histamine H2 receptors
*d. Inhibition of histamine H1 receptors
e. Decrease of leukotriene release
287. A female patient was prescribed loratadine to treat her allergic dermatitis caused by bee sting. What is the mechanism of the drug's antiallergic action?
a. Inhibition of histamine H2 receptors
b. Decrease of leukotriene release
c. Antiserotonin activity
*d. Inhibition of histamine H1 receptors
e. Block of leukotriene D4 receptors
288. A female patient with mycoplasmal pneumonia was prescribed doxycycline. What group of antibiotics does this drug belong to?
*a. Tetracyclines
b. Macrolides
c. Cephalosporines
d. Penicillines
e. Lincosamides
289. A female patient with mycoplasmal pneumonia was prescribed doxycycline. What group of antibiotics does this drug belong to?
a. Lincosamides
b. Macrolides
c. Penicillines
d. Cephalosporines
*e. Tetracyclines
290. A female patient with mycoplasmal pneumonia was prescribed doxycycline. What group of antibiotics does this drug belong to?
a. Macrolides
b. Cephalosporines
*c. Tetracyclines
d. Lincosamides
e. Penicillines
291. A female student with a cold has been prescribed an antipyretic medication. Specify this drug:
a. Ascorbic acid
b. Cyanocobalamin
c. Famotidine
*d. Paracetamol
e. Oxytocin
292. A female student with a cold has been prescribed an antipyretic medication. Specify this drug:
a. Cyanocobalamin
b. Famotidine
*c. Paracetamol
d. Ascorbic acid
e. Oxytocin
293. A female student with a cold has been prescribed an antipyretic medication. Specify this drug:
a. Famotidine
b. Cyanocobalamin
*c. Paracetamol
d. Ascorbic acid
e. Oxytocin
294. A fibrinolysis inhibitor was used to stop postpartum bleeding. Name this drug.
a. Calcium chloride
b. Nettle leaves
*c. Aminocaproic acid
d. Thrombin
e. Hemostatic sponge
295. A fibrinolysis inhibitor was used to stop postpartum bleeding. Name this drug.
a. Nettle leaves
*b. Aminocaproic acid
c. Calcium chloride
d. Thrombin
e. Hemostatic sponge
296. A fibrinolysis inhibitor was used to stop postpartum bleeding. Name this drug.
a. Thrombin
*b. Aminocaproic acid
c. Nettle leaves
d. Calcium chloride
e. Hemostatic sponge
297. A food plant of Polygonaceae family is being studied. The plant has reddish stalk, cordate-sagittate leaves, its fruit is a trihedral nutlet. Name this plant:
a. Persicaria bistorta
b. Persicaria hydropiper
c. Rumex confertus
*d. Fagopyrum esculentum
e. Polygonum aviculare
298. A food plant of Polygonaceae family is being studied. The plant has reddish stalk, cordate-sagittate leaves, its fruit is a trihedral nutlet. Name this plant:
a. Persicaria hydropiper
*b. Fagopyrum esculentum
c. Rumex confertus
d. Persicaria bistorta
e. Polygonum aviculare
299. A food plant of Polygonaceae family is being studied. The plant has reddish stalk, cordate-sagittate leaves, its fruit is a trihedral nutlet. Name this plant:
a. Rumex confertus
b. Persicaria hydropiper
*c. Fagopyrum esculentum
d. Persicaria bistorta
e. Polygonum aviculare
300. A fruit consists of overgrown conic red pulpy hypanthium and proper carpels - small nuciform achenes recessed in the fruit pulp. This type of fruit belongs to:
*a. Fragaria vesca
b. Pyrus communis
c. Aronia melanocarpa
d. Rubus idaeus
e. Rosa canina
301. A fruit consists of overgrown conic red pulpy hypanthium and proper carpels - small nuciform achenes recessed in the fruit pulp. This type of fruit belongs to:
a. Rubus idaeus
*b. Fragaria vesca
c. Pyrus communis
d. Aronia melanocarpa
e. Rosa canina
302. A fruit consists of overgrown conic red pulpy hypanthium and proper carpels - small nuciform achenes recessed in the fruit pulp. This type of fruit belongs to:
a. Rubus idaeus
b. Aronia melanocarpa
c. Pyrus communis
d. Rosa canina
*e. Fragaria vesca
303. A fruit is a capsule with oblate light brown smooth glossy seeds that mucify when moistened. This fruit belongs to:
*a. Linum usitatissimum
b. Hypericum perforatum
c. Digitalis purpurea
d. Ledum palustre
e. Linaria vulgaris
304. A fruit is a capsule with oblate light brown smooth glossy seeds that mucify when moistened. This fruit belongs to:
a. Ledum palustre
b. Linaria vulgaris
*c. Linum usitatissimum
d. Digitalis purpurea
e. Hypericum perforatum
305. A fruit is a capsule with oblate light brown smooth glossy seeds that mucify when moistened. This fruit belongs to:
a. Linaria vulgaris
b. Digitalis purpurea
c. Hypericum perforatum
*d. Linum usitatissimum
e. Ledum palustre
306. A fruit tree of Rosaceae family has short thorny shoots; the fruit is a distinctively-shaped pome with stone cells in its pulp. Name this plant:
a. Prunus armeniaca
b. Prunus spinosa
c. Malus sylvestris
*d. Pyrus communis
e. Cerasus vulgaris
307. A fruit tree of Rosaceae family has short thorny shoots; the fruit is a distinctively-shaped pome with stone cells in its pulp. Name this plant:
a. Prunus spinosa
*b. Pyrus communis
c. Cerasus vulgaris
d. Prunus armeniaca
e. Malus sylvestris
308. A fruit tree of Rosaceae family has short thorny shoots; the fruit is a distinctively-shaped pome with stone cells in its pulp. Name this plant:
a. Prunus spinosa
b. Cerasus vulgaris
c. Malus sylvestris
d. Prunus armeniaca
*e. Pyrus communis
309. A gastric tea contains small oval brown lignified cone-shaped plant parts up to 1.5 cm in length that can be identified as:
*a. Aggregate fruits of alnus
b. Berry-like juniper cones
c. Cypress cones
d. Platycladus orientalis cones
e. Larch cones
310. A gastric tea contains small oval brown lignified cone-shaped plant parts up to 1.5 cm in length that can be identified as:
*a. Aggregate fruits of alnus
b. Larch cones
c. Platycladus orientalis cones
d. Cypress cones
e. Berry-like juniper cones
311. A girl with type 1 diabetes mellitus has developed chronic kidney failure. What complication of diabetes is the cause of diabetic nephropathy in this case?
*a. Microangiopathy
b. Retinopathy
c. Fetopathy
d. Macroangiopathy
e. Neuropathy
312. A girl with type 1 diabetes mellitus has developed chronic kidney failure. What complication of diabetes is the cause of diabetic nephropathy in this case?
a. Fetopathy
b. Macroangiopathy
*c. Microangiopathy
d. Retinopathy
e. Neuropathy
313. A girl with type 1 diabetes mellitus has developed chronic kidney failure. What complication of diabetes is the cause of diabetic nephropathy in this case?
a. Macroangiopathy
*b. Microangiopathy
c. Neuropathy
d. Fetopathy
e. Retinopathy
314. A group of tourists set off for a hiking tour into the mountains. Two hours after the departure, some of them developed tachycardia and shortness of breath, which indicates hypoxia. What type of hypoxia is the cause of these disorders?
a. Hemic hypoxia
*b. Hypoxic hypoxia
c. Respiratory hypoxia
d. Tissue hypoxia
e. Circulatory hypoxia
315. A group of tourists set off for a hiking tour into the mountains. Two hours after the departure, some of them developed tachycardia and shortness of breath, which indicates hypoxia. What type of hypoxia is the cause of these disorders?
a. Hemic hypoxia
b. Tissue hypoxia
c. Respiratory hypoxia
*d. Hypoxic hypoxia
e. Circulatory hypoxia
316. A herbaceous plant of Malvaceae famiy has expectorant and coating properties. The plant has pale pink flowers gathered into apical panicles and schizocarpous fruit, which means it belongs to the following species:
a. Plantago psyllium
b. Tussilago farfara
c. Thymus serpyllum
d. Plantago major
*e. Althaea officinalis
317. A herbaceous plant of Malvaceae famiy has expectorant and coating properties. The plant has pale pink flowers gathered into apical panicles and schizocarpous fruit, which means it belongs to the following species:
a. Thymus serpyllum
b. Plantago major
*c. Althaea officinalis
d. Tussilago farfara
e. Plantago psyllium
318. A herbaceous plant of Malvaceae famiy has expectorant and coating properties. The plant has pale pink flowers gathered into apical panicles and schizocarpous fruit, which means it belongs to the following species:
a. Tussilago farfara
b. Plantago major
c. Plantago psyllium
d. Thymus serpyllum
*e. Althaea officinalis
319. A hospitalised patient was diagnosed with immunity deficiency that resulted in low resistance against viral infection. What cells are most probably deficient?
a. B-lymphocytes
b. Fibroblasts
c. Macrophages
d. Neutrophiles
*e. T-lymphocytes
320. A hospitalised patient was diagnosed with immunity deficiency that resulted in low resistance against viral infection. What cells are most probably deficient?
a. B-lymphocytes
b. Macrophages
c. Neutrophiles
*d. T-lymphocytes
e. Fibroblasts
321. A hospitalised patient was diagnosed with immunity deficiency that resulted in low resistance against viral infection. What cells are most probably deficient?
a. Macrophages
*b. T-lymphocytes
c. Neutrophiles
d. B-lymphocytes
e. Fibroblasts
322. A laboratory has conducted a soil study to identify the causative agents of an anaerobic infection. Spore-forming is a characteristic feature of these bacteria. What staining technique can be used to detect spores?
a. Morozov stain
b. Neisser stain
*c. Ozheshko stain
d. Romanowsky-Giemsa stain
e. Burri-Gins stain
323. A laboratory has conducted a soil study to identify the causative agents of an anaerobic infection. Spore-forming is a characteristic feature of these bacteria. What staining technique can be used to detect spores?
a. Morozov stain
b. Romanowsky-Giemsa stain
*c. Ozheshko stain
d. Neisser stain
e. Burri-Gins stain
324. A laboratory has conducted a soil study to identify the causative agents of an anaerobic infection. Spore-forming is a characteristic feature of these bacteria. What staining technique can be used to detect spores?
a. Neisser stain
b. Morozov stain
*c. Ozheshko stain
d. Burri-Gins stain
e. Romanowsky-Giemsa stain
325. A laboratory has received a sample of copper(II) sulfate pentahydrate. Choose the method for quantification of copper(II) in copper sulfate.
a. Alkalimetry
*b. Iodometry
c. Argentometry
d. Permanganatometry
e. Acidimetry
326. A laboratory has received a sample of copper(II) sulfate pentahydrate. Choose the method for quantification of copper(II) in copper sulfate.
a. Permanganatometry
b. Alkalimetry
c. Acidimetry
d. Argentometry
*e. Iodometry
327. A laboratory has received a sample of copper(II) sulfate pentahydrate. Choose the method for quantification of copper(II) in copper sulfate.
a. Permanganatometry
b. Argentometry
c. Alkalimetry
*d. Iodometry
e. Acidimetry
328. A laboratory received a food product that had been taken from the focus of food poisoning and presumably contained botulinum toxin. To identify the type of toxin, the neutralization reaction must be performed on white mice. What biological product is used in this reaction?
a. Allergen
b. Antibacterial serum
c. Diagnosticum
*d. Antitoxic serum
e. Normal serum
329. A laboratory received a food product that had been taken from the focus of food poisoning and presumably contained botulinum toxin. To identify the type of toxin, the neutralization reaction must be performed on white mice. What biological product is used in this reaction?
a. Normal serum
*b. Antitoxic serum
c. Allergen
d. Diagnosticum
e. Antibacterial serum
330. A laboratory received a food product that had been taken from the focus of food poisoning and presumably contained botulinum toxin. To identify the type of toxin, the neutralization reaction must be performed on white mice. What biological product is used in this reaction?
a. Normal serum
b. Diagnosticum
c. Allergen
d. Antibacterial serum
*e. Antitoxic serum
331. A laboratory received ethanol and methanol. What reaction can be used to distinguish between these two substances?
a. Formation of a chelate complex with copper hydroxide
*b. Iodoform test (I_2 + NaOH)
c. Oxidation (CrO_3, H_2SO_4)
d. Reaction with halogen anhydrides of inorganic acids
e. Beilstein test
332. A laboratory received ethanol and methanol. What reaction can be used to distinguish between these two substances?
a. Formation of a chelate complex with copper hydroxide
b. Oxidation (CrO_3, H_2SO_4)
c. Beilstein test
d. Reaction with halogen anhydrides of inorganic acids
*e. Iodoform test (I_2 + NaOH)
333. A laboratory received ethanol and methanol. What reaction can be used to distinguish between these two substances?
a. Reaction with halogen anhydrides of inorganic acids
b. Oxidation (CrO_3, H_2SO_4)
c. Formation of a chelate complex with copper hydroxide
*d. Iodoform test (I_2 + NaOH)
e. Beilstein test
334. A man came to a doctor complaining of a severe joint pain. Urinalysis shows increased levels of uric acid, which indicates:
a. Increased activity of fatty acid beta-  oxidation
*b. Intensive breakdown of purine  nucleotides
c. Increased synthesis of ketone bodies
d. Increased glycogenolysis activity
e. Increased glycolysis activity
335. A man came to a doctor complaining of a severe joint pain. Urinalysis shows increased levels of uric acid, which indicates:
a. Increased glycolysis activity
b. Increased activity of fatty acid beta-  oxidation
c. Increased synthesis of ketone bodies
*d. Intensive breakdown of purine  nucleotides
e. Increased glycogenolysis activity
336. A man came to a doctor complaining of a severe joint pain. Urinalysis shows increased levels of uric acid, which indicates:
a. Increased glycolysis activity
b. Increased glycogenolysis activity
c. Increased activity of fatty acid beta-  oxidation
*d. Intensive breakdown of purine  nucleotides
e. Increased synthesis of ketone bodies
337. A man has acute glomerulonephritis. Because of oliguria, water retention is observed in his body. What abnormality of the total blood volume is most likely to be detected in this patient?
a. Oligocythemic normovolemia
b. Simple hypovolemia
*c. Oligocythemic hypervolemia
d. Polycythemic hypervolemia
e. Simple hypervolemia
338. A man has acute glomerulonephritis. Because of oliguria, water retention is observed in his body. What abnormality of the total blood volume is most likely to be detected in this patient?
a. Simple hypervolemia
b. Polycythemic hypervolemia
c. Oligocythemic normovolemia
*d. Oligocythemic hypervolemia
e. Simple hypovolemia
339. A man has acute glomerulonephritis. Because of oliguria, water retention is observed in his body. What abnormality of the total blood volume is most likely to be detected in this patient?
a. Simple hypovolemia
b. Polycythemic hypervolemia
c. Oligocythemic normovolemia
*d. Oligocythemic hypervolemia
e. Simple hypervolemia
340. A man has been hospitalized into the intensive care unit in a severe condition after carbon monoxide poisoning. What substance has formed in this case, causing the severe condition in the patient?
a. Methemoglobin
b. Carbhemoglobin
c. Fetal hemoglobin
d. Oxyhemoglobin
*e. Carboxyhemoglobin
341. A man has been hospitalized into the intensive care unit in a severe condition after carbon monoxide poisoning. What substance has formed in this case, causing the severe condition in the patient?
a. Methemoglobin
b. Carbhemoglobin
c. Oxyhemoglobin
d. Fetal hemoglobin
*e. Carboxyhemoglobin
342. A man has been hospitalized into the intensive care unit in a severe condition after carbon monoxide poisoning. What substance has formed in this case, causing the severe condition in the patient?
a. Oxyhemoglobin
*b. Carboxyhemoglobin
c. Fetal hemoglobin
d. Carbhemoglobin
e. Methemoglobin
343. A man presents with signs of albinism: blonde hair, extreme photosensitivity, impaired vision. What amino acid metabolism is disturbed in the patient?
a. Histidine
b. Proline
c. Valine
*d. Tyrosine
e. Methionine
344. A man presents with signs of albinism: blonde hair, extreme photosensitivity, impaired vision. What amino acid metabolism is disturbed in the patient?
a. Methionine
*b. Tyrosine
c. Valine
d. Histidine
e. Proline
345. A man presents with signs of albinism: blonde hair, extreme photosensitivity, impaired vision. What amino acid metabolism is disturbed in the patient?
a. Proline
b. Valine
*c. Tyrosine
d. Methionine
e. Histidine
346. A man suffers from cholelithiasis. What medicine should he be prescribed for biliary colic relief?
a. Bisacodyl
*b. Magnesium sulfate
c. Pancreatin
d. Almagel (Algeldrate + magnesium  hydroxide)
e. Contrykal (Aprotinin)
347. A man suffers from cholelithiasis. What medicine should he be prescribed for biliary colic relief?
a. Contrykal (Aprotinin)
b. Pancreatin
c. Bisacodyl
d. Almagel (Algeldrate + magnesium  hydroxide)
*e. Magnesium sulfate
348. A man suffers from cholelithiasis. What medicine should he be prescribed for biliary colic relief?
a. Pancreatin
b. Bisacodyl
*c. Magnesium sulfate
d. Almagel (Algeldrate + magnesium  hydroxide)
e. Contrykal (Aprotinin)
349. A man was brought into the admission room with complaints of problematic breathing, salivation, spastic abdominal pain, diarrhea, dizziness, and deteriorating visual acuity. He was diagnosed with a poisoning caused by organophosphorus compounds. What medicines should be included into the pathogenetic therapy in this case?
*a. Atropine sulfate and dipyroxime  (trimedoxime bromide)
b. Tetacin-calcium (sodium  calcium edetate) and unithiol (dimercaptopropansulfonate)
c. Glucose and bemegride
d. Sodium thiosulfate and bemegride
e. Nalorphine hydrochloride and  bemegride
350. A man was brought into the admission room with complaints of problematic breathing, salivation, spastic abdominal pain, diarrhea, dizziness, and deteriorating visual acuity. He was diagnosed with a poisoning caused by organophosphorus compounds. What medicines should be included into the pathogenetic therapy in this case?
a. Glucose and bemegride
*b. Atropine sulfate and dipyroxime  (trimedoxime bromide)
c. Sodium thiosulfate and bemegride
d. Nalorphine hydrochloride and  bemegride
e. Tetacin-calcium (sodium  calcium edetate) and unithiol (dimercaptopropansulfonate)
351. A man was brought into the admission room with complaints of problematic breathing, salivation, spastic abdominal pain, diarrhea, dizziness, and deteriorating visual acuity. He was diagnosed with a poisoning caused by organophosphorus compounds. What medicines should be included into the pathogenetic therapy in this case?
a. Glucose and bemegride
b. Sodium thiosulfate and bemegride
*c. Atropine sulfate and dipyroxime  (trimedoxime bromide)
d. Tetacin-calcium (sodium  calcium edetate) and unithiol (dimercaptopropansulfonate)
e. Nalorphine hydrochloride and  bemegride
352. A man with Trichomonas urethritis was prescribed an imidazole derivative for treatment. Name this drug:
*a. Metronidazole
b. Azithromycin
c. Furacilin (Nitrofural)
d. Ciprofloxacin
e. Nitroxoline
353. A man with Trichomonas urethritis was prescribed an imidazole derivative for treatment. Name this drug:
*a. Metronidazole
b. Furacilin (Nitrofural)
c. Nitroxoline
d. Azithromycin
e. Ciprofloxacin
354. A man with Trichomonas urethritis was prescribed an imidazole derivative for treatment. Name this drug:
a. Nitroxoline
*b. Metronidazole
c. Ciprofloxacin
d. Furacilin (Nitrofural)
e. Azithromycin
355. A man with allergic dermatitis and disturbed sleep came to a doctor. What antihistamine would be optimal in this case?
a. Ampicillin
b. Loratadine
c. Enterosgel (Polymethylsiloxane  polyhydrate)
*d. Dimedrol (Diphenhydramine)
e. Dexamethasone
356. A man with allergic dermatitis and disturbed sleep came to a doctor. What antihistamine would be optimal in this case?
a. Enterosgel (Polymethylsiloxane  polyhydrate)
b. Dexamethasone
c. Loratadine
d. Ampicillin
*e. Dimedrol (Diphenhydramine)
357. A man with gout has a significant increase in blood levels of uric acid. Uric acid is an end product of the metabolism of:
a. Albumins
b. Fatty acids
*c. Purine bases
d. Triglycerides
e. Globulins
358. A man with gout has a significant increase in blood levels of uric acid. Uric acid is an end product of the metabolism of:
a. Fatty acids
b. Globulins
c. Albumins
d. Triglycerides
*e. Purine bases
359. A man with gout has a significant increase in blood levels of uric acid. Uric acid is an end product of the metabolism of:
a. Fatty acids
b. Globulins
c. Triglycerides
d. Albumins
*e. Purine bases
360. A man with left ventricular heart failure and signs of developing pulmonary edema was brought into an emergency hospital. What is the primary pathogenetic mechanism of the developed edema in this case?
a. Membranogenic
b. Lymphogenic
c. Colloidal-osmotic
*d. Hydrodynamic
e. Toxic
361. A man with left ventricular heart failure and signs of developing pulmonary edema was brought into an emergency hospital. What is the primary pathogenetic mechanism of the developed edema in this case?
a. Toxic
*b. Hydrodynamic
c. Lymphogenic
d. Membranogenic
e. Colloidal-osmotic
362. A man with left ventricular heart failure and signs of developing pulmonary edema was brought into an emergency hospital. What is the primary pathogenetic mechanism of the developed edema in this case?
a. Toxic
b. Colloidal-osmotic
c. Membranogenic
*d. Hydrodynamic
e. Lymphogenic
363. A man with signs of glomerulonephritis came to a hospital. What pathological components in his urine indicate the increased permeability of the glomerular membrane?
a. Pus
b. Acetone
*c. Protein
d. Bilirubin
e. Glucose
364. A man with signs of glomerulonephritis came to a hospital. What pathological components in his urine indicate the increased permeability of the glomerular membrane?
a. Pus
b. Acetone
*c. Protein
d. Glucose
e. Bilirubin
365. A man with signs of glomerulonephritis came to a hospital. What pathological components in his urine indicate the increased permeability of the glomerular membrane?
a. Pus
b. Glucose
c. Bilirubin
d. Acetone
*e. Protein
366. A melliferous tree has heart-shaped leaves and dichasial cyme inflorescences with winged perianth. This plant is:
*a. Tilia cordata
b. Aronia melanocarpa
c. Robinia pseudoacacia
d. Quercus robur
e. Aesculus hippocastanus
367. A melliferous tree has heart-shaped leaves and dichasial cyme inflorescences with winged perianth. This plant is:
a. Quercus robur
b. Robinia pseudoacacia
c. Aesculus hippocastanus
d. Aronia melanocarpa
*e. Tilia cordata
368. A melliferous tree has heart-shaped leaves and dichasial cyme inflorescences with winged perianth. This plant is:
a. Robinia pseudoacacia
b. Quercus robur
*c. Tilia cordata
d. Aronia melanocarpa
e. Aesculus hippocastanus
369. A miner, who was trapped under a rock pile, developed crush syndrome and signs of hepatic coma. Hyperammonemia was detected in his blood. What process has caused the increase in the ammonia levels in the patient's blood?
a. Gluconeogenesis
b. Bilirubin catabolism
c. Hydroxylation of amino acids
d. Glycolysis
*e. Deamination of amino acids
370. A miner, who was trapped under a rock pile, developed crush syndrome and signs of hepatic coma. Hyperammonemia was detected in his blood. What process has caused the increase in the ammonia levels in the patient's blood?
a. Glycolysis
b. Bilirubin catabolism
c. Hydroxylation of amino acids
d. Gluconeogenesis
*e. Deamination of amino acids
371. A miner, who was trapped under a rock pile, developed crush syndrome and signs of hepatic coma. Hyperammonemia was detected in his blood. What process has caused the increase in the ammonia levels in the patient's blood?
a. Glycolysis
b. Hydroxylation of amino acids
*c. Deamination of amino acids
d. Bilirubin catabolism
e. Gluconeogenesis
372. A modern drug that inhibits the HMG-CoA reductase enzyme and reduces cholesterol synthesis was received by a pharmacy chain. Name this drug.
*a. Atorvastatin
b. Lisinopril
c. Enalapril
d. Furosemide
e. Hydrochlorothiazide
373. A modern drug that inhibits the HMG-CoA reductase enzyme and reduces cholesterol synthesis was received by a pharmacy chain. Name this drug.
a. Hydrochlorothiazide
b. Enalapril
c. Furosemide
d. Lisinopril
*e. Atorvastatin
374. A modern drug that inhibits the HMG-CoA reductase enzyme and reduces cholesterol synthesis was received by a pharmacy chain. Name this drug.
a. Lisinopril
*b. Atorvastatin
c. Hydrochlorothiazide
d. Enalapril
e. Furosemide
375. A mother with a 6-year-old child came to a local pediatrician. She complains that her child has sore throat and problems with breathing. The doctor suspects laryngeal diphtheria. What external breathing disorder can develop with such localization of the disease?
a. Biot respiration
b. Slow, deep, with labored expiration
c. Cheyne-Stokes respiration
*d. Slow, deep, with labored inspiration
e. Rapid, shallow
376. A mother with a 6-year-old child came to a local pediatrician. She complains that her child has sore throat and problems with breathing. The doctor suspects laryngeal diphtheria. What external breathing disorder can develop with such localization of the disease?
a. Rapid, shallow
b. Cheyne-Stokes respiration
c. Slow, deep, with labored expiration
d. Biot respiration
*e. Slow, deep, with labored inspiration
377. A mother with a 6-year-old child came to a local pediatrician. She complains that her child has sore throat and problems with breathing. The doctor suspects laryngeal diphtheria. What external breathing disorder can develop with such localization of the disease?
a. Slow, deep, with labored expiration
*b. Slow, deep, with labored inspiration
c. Cheyne-Stokes respiration
d. Rapid, shallow
e. Biot respiration
378. A mushroom picker, who accidentially ate death cap mushroom, has been hospitalised. Death cap toxin - alpha-amanitine - inhibits RNA-polymerase II in eukaryotes. What process requires this enzyme?
a. Recognition
b. Translation
c. Reparation
*d. Transcription
e. Replication
379. A mushroom picker, who accidentially ate death cap mushroom, has been hospitalised. Death cap toxin - alpha-amanitine - inhibits RNA-polymerase II in eukaryotes. What process requires this enzyme?
a. Reparation
b. Recognition
*c. Transcription
d. Translation
e. Replication
380. A mushroom picker, who accidentially ate death cap mushroom, has been hospitalised. Death cap toxin - alpha-amanitine - inhibits RNA-polymerase II in eukaryotes. What process requires this enzyme?
a. Translation
b. Recognition
c. Reparation
d. Replication
*e. Transcription
381. A narcological department has received a man diagnosed with morphinism. The doctor notes decreased pharmacological activity of morphine. Name the phenomenon, when drug effectiveness is decreased after its repeated administration:
a. Functional cumulation
b. Material cumulation
c. Summation
*d. Tolerance
e. Antagonism
382. A narcological department has received a man diagnosed with morphinism. The doctor notes decreased pharmacological activity of morphine. Name the phenomenon, when drug effectiveness is decreased after its repeated administration:
a. Summation
b. Antagonism
*c. Tolerance
d. Functional cumulation
e. Material cumulation
383. A narcological department has received a man diagnosed with morphinism. The doctor notes decreased pharmacological activity of morphine. Name the phenomenon, when drug effectiveness is decreased after its repeated administration:
a. Summation
b. Functional cumulation
c. Antagonism
*d. Tolerance
e. Material cumulation
384. A pathological process in the blood serum has caused increased ammonia levels. What is the main way of toxic ammonia neutralization?
*a. Urea synthesis
b. Alanine synthesis
c. Ammonium salt synthesis
d. Glycine synthesis
e. Uric acid synthesis
385. A pathological process in the blood serum has caused increased ammonia levels. What is the main way of toxic ammonia neutralization?
a. Alanine synthesis
b. Ammonium salt synthesis
c. Glycine synthesis
*d. Urea synthesis
e. Uric acid synthesis
386. A pathological process in the blood serum has caused increased ammonia levels. What is the main way of toxic ammonia neutralization?
a. Alanine synthesis
b. Uric acid synthesis
*c. Urea synthesis
d. Glycine synthesis
e. Ammonium salt synthesis
387. A patient at the gastroenterological department presents with disturbed digestion of proteins, which is why the activation of the decay of proteins can be observed in the patient's large intestine. What compound forms in a large amount under these conditions?
*a. Putrescine
b. Glycerine
c. Cholesterol
d. Glycogen
e. Glucose
388. A patient at the gastroenterological department presents with disturbed digestion of proteins, which is why the activation of the decay of proteins can be observed in the patient's large intestine. What compound forms in a large amount under these conditions?
*a. Putrescine
b. Glycogen
c. Glycerine
d. Cholesterol
e. Glucose
389. A patient at the gastroenterological department presents with disturbed digestion of proteins, which is why the activation of the decay of proteins can be observed in the patient's large intestine. What compound forms in a large amount under these conditions?
a. Cholesterol
b. Glucose
c. Glycerine
*d. Putrescine
e. Glycogen
390. A patient came to the pharmacy to obtain a drug that contains pancreatic enzymes and can be taked for chronic pancreatitis. What drug would be recommended by the dispensing chemist?
a. Gordox (Aprotinin)
b. Omeprazole
*c. Pancreatine
d. Triamcinolone
e. Pirenzepine
391. A patient came to the pharmacy to obtain a drug that contains pancreatic enzymes and can be taked for chronic pancreatitis. What drug would be recommended by the dispensing chemist?
a. Gordox (Aprotinin)
b. Pirenzepine
c. Omeprazole
*d. Pancreatine
e. Triamcinolone
392. A patient came to the pharmacy to obtain a drug that contains pancreatic enzymes and can be taked for chronic pancreatitis. What drug would be recommended by the dispensing chemist?
a. Pirenzepine
b. Triamcinolone
c. Gordox (Aprotinin)
d. Omeprazole
*e. Pancreatine
393. A patient came to the pharmacy to obtain an antidiarrheal agent. What drug would be recommended by the dispensing chemist?
*a. Loperamide
b. Anesthesin (Benzocaine)
c. Dicaine (Tetracaine)
d. Ranitidine
e. Picolax (Sodium picosulfate)
394. A patient came to the pharmacy to obtain an antidiarrheal agent. What drug would be recommended by the dispensing chemist?
a. Dicaine (Tetracaine)
b. Ranitidine
*c. Loperamide
d. Picolax (Sodium picosulfate)
e. Anesthesin (Benzocaine)
395. A patient came to the pharmacy to obtain an antidiarrheal agent. What drug would be recommended by the dispensing chemist?
a. Ranitidine
b. Anesthesin (Benzocaine)
c. Dicaine (Tetracaine)
d. Picolax (Sodium picosulfate)
*e. Loperamide
396. A patient complains of a girdling epigastric pain. Examination reveals increased diastase levels in the patient's urine and undigested fat in the stool. These signs are the most characteristic of the following pathology:
*a. Acute pancreatitis
b. Infectious hepatitis
c. Acute appendicitis
d. Gastritis
e. Enterocolitis
397. A patient complains of a girdling epigastric pain. Examination reveals increased diastase levels in the patient's urine and undigested fat in the stool. These signs are the most characteristic of the following pathology:
*a. Acute pancreatitis
b. Infectious hepatitis
c. Enterocolitis
d. Acute appendicitis
e. Gastritis
398. A patient complains of a girdling epigastric pain. Examination reveals increased diastase levels in the patient's urine and undigested fat in the stool. These signs are the most characteristic of the following pathology:
a. Acute appendicitis
b. Infectious hepatitis
c. Gastritis
d. Enterocolitis
*e. Acute pancreatitis
399. A patient complains of increased urine 24-hour volume and thirst. Laboratory analysis detects acetone and high levels of sugar in his urine. What hormone secretion is disturbed, leading to these changes?
a. Aldosterone
b. Testosterone
*c. Insulin
d. Glucagon
e. Vasopressin
400. A patient complains of increased urine 24-hour volume and thirst. Laboratory analysis detects acetone and high levels of sugar in his urine. What hormone secretion is disturbed, leading to these changes?
a. Aldosterone
b. Testosterone
*c. Insulin
d. Vasopressin
e. Glucagon
401. A patient complains of increased urine 24-hour volume and thirst. Laboratory analysis detects acetone and high levels of sugar in his urine. What hormone secretion is disturbed, leading to these changes?
a. Testosterone
b. Glucagon
c. Aldosterone
d. Vasopressin
*e. Insulin
402. A patient complains of low body temperature, weight gain, inertness, and drowsiness. T4 and T3 levels are decreased in his blood plasma. These signs are characteristic of the following pathology:
a. Albinism
b. Phenylketonuria
*c. Myxedema
d. Diabetes mellitus
e. Pellagra
403. A patient complains of low body temperature, weight gain, inertness, and drowsiness. T4 and T3 levels are decreased in his blood plasma. These signs are characteristic of the following pathology:
a. Diabetes mellitus
b. Albinism
c. Phenylketonuria
*d. Myxedema
e. Pellagra
404. A patient complains of low body temperature, weight gain, inertness, and drowsiness. T4 and T3 levels are decreased in his blood plasma. These signs are characteristic of the following pathology:
a. Diabetes mellitus
b. Phenylketonuria
*c. Myxedema
d. Albinism
e. Pellagra
405. A patient complains of maldigestion of nutrients and intestinal bloating. The doctor suspects acute pancreatitis and has ordered a diastase (alpha-amylase) activity test to confirm this diagnosis. Activity of this enzyme can be measured based on the breakdown of:
*a. Starch
b. Cellulose
c. Collagen
d. Albumin
e. Chitin
406. A patient complains of maldigestion of nutrients and intestinal bloating. The doctor suspects acute pancreatitis and has ordered a diastase (alpha-amylase) activity test to confirm this diagnosis. Activity of this enzyme can be measured based on the breakdown of:
a. Albumin
b. Cellulose
*c. Starch
d. Collagen
e. Chitin
407. A patient complains of maldigestion of nutrients and intestinal bloating. The doctor suspects acute pancreatitis and has ordered a diastase (alpha-amylase) activity test to confirm this diagnosis. Activity of this enzyme can be measured based on the breakdown of:
a. Albumin
b. Collagen
c. Cellulose
*d. Starch
e. Chitin
408. A patient consulted a doctor about sunburns, decreased visual acuity. His hair, skin and eyes are not pigmented. He has been diagnosed with albinism. The patient presents with the following enzyme deficiency:
a. Arginase
b. Histidine decarboxylase
c. Hexokinase
*d. Tyrosinase
e. Carbonic anhydrase
409. A patient consulted a doctor about sunburns, decreased visual acuity. His hair, skin and eyes are not pigmented. He has been diagnosed with albinism. The patient presents with the following enzyme deficiency:
a. Carbonic anhydrase
*b. Tyrosinase
c. Hexokinase
d. Histidine decarboxylase
e. Arginase
410. A patient consulted a doctor about sunburns, decreased visual acuity. His hair, skin and eyes are not pigmented. He has been diagnosed with albinism. The patient presents with the following enzyme deficiency:
a. Carbonic anhydrase
b. Hexokinase
c. Arginase
*d. Tyrosinase
e. Histidine decarboxylase
411. A patient developed a hemorrhage caused by a long-term use of neodicumarin (ethyl biscoumacetate). What neodicumarin antagonist must be used in this case?
*a. Vicasol (Menadione)
b. Aminocaproic acid
c. Etamsylate
d. Ascorbic acid
e. Fibrinogen
412. A patient developed a hemorrhage caused by a long-term use of neodicumarin (ethyl biscoumacetate). What neodicumarin antagonist must be used in this case?
a. Aminocaproic acid
*b. Vicasol (Menadione)
c. Ascorbic acid
d. Fibrinogen
e. Etamsylate
413. A patient developed a hemorrhage caused by a long-term use of neodicumarin (ethyl biscoumacetate). What neodicumarin antagonist must be used in this case?
a. Aminocaproic acid
b. Etamsylate
c. Fibrinogen
d. Ascorbic acid
*e. Vicasol (Menadione)
414. A patient developed a keloid scar at the site of skin inflammation. This condition is associated with an abnormal course of a certain stage of inflammation. Name this stage.
a. Exudation
b. Primary alteration
c. Secondary alteration
*d. Proliferation
e. Progression
415. A patient developed a keloid scar at the site of skin inflammation. This condition is associated with an abnormal course of a certain stage of inflammation. Name this stage.
a. Secondary alteration
b. Exudation
c. Progression
*d. Proliferation
e. Primary alteration
416. A patient developed a keloid scar at the site of skin inflammation. This condition is associated with an abnormal course of a certain stage of inflammation. Name this stage.
a. Secondary alteration
b. Progression
c. Exudation
d. Primary alteration
*e. Proliferation
417. A patient developed an atrioventricular block. What drug is indicated in this case?
a. Anaprilin (Propranolol)
*b. Atropine
c. Clophelin (Clonidine)
d. Pirenzepine
e. Metoprolol
418. A patient developed an atrioventricular block. What drug is indicated in this case?
a. Anaprilin (Propranolol)
b. Clophelin (Clonidine)
c. Pirenzepine
*d. Atropine
e. Metoprolol
419. A patient developed an atrioventricular block. What drug is indicated in this case?
a. Clophelin (Clonidine)
b. Anaprilin (Propranolol)
*c. Atropine
d. Metoprolol
e. Pirenzepine
420. A patient developed anaphylactic shock after administration of lidocaine. What antibodies cause the development of this allergic reaction?
*a. IgE
b. IgG
c. IgА
d. IgD
e. IgМ
421. A patient developed anaphylactic shock after administration of lidocaine. What antibodies cause the development of this allergic reaction?
*a. IgE
b. IgМ
c. IgD
d. IgА
e. IgG
422. A patient developed anaphylactic shock after administration of lidocaine. What antibodies cause the development of this allergic reaction?
a. IgG
*b. IgE
c. IgА
d. IgD
e. IgМ
423. A patient developed candidiasis caused by long-term antibiotic treatment. What drug should be used in this case to eliminate candidiasis?
a. Rubomycin (Daunorubicin)
*b. Nystatin
c. Fumagillin
d. Interferon
e. Sulfadimezin (Sulfadimidine)
424. A patient developed candidiasis caused by long-term antibiotic treatment. What drug should be used in this case to eliminate candidiasis?
a. Rubomycin (Daunorubicin)
b. Interferon
c. Fumagillin
*d. Nystatin
e. Sulfadimezin (Sulfadimidine)
425. A patient developed candidiasis caused by long-term antibiotic treatment. What drug should be used in this case to eliminate candidiasis?
a. Sulfadimezin (Sulfadimidine)
*b. Nystatin
c. Rubomycin (Daunorubicin)
d. Fumagillin
e. Interferon
426. A patient developed neuritis of the facial nerve after 5 months of anti-tuberculosis treatment. What drug has caused this side effect?
a. Benzylpenicillin sodium
*b. Isoniazid
c. Ceftriaxone
d. Rifampicin
e. Sodium para-aminosalicylate
427. A patient developed neuritis of the facial nerve after 5 months of anti-tuberculosis treatment. What drug has caused this side effect?
a. Rifampicin
*b. Isoniazid
c. Ceftriaxone
d. Benzylpenicillin sodium
e. Sodium para-aminosalicylate
428. A patient developed neuritis of the facial nerve after 5 months of anti-tuberculosis treatment. What drug has caused this side effect?
a. Rifampicin
b. Ceftriaxone
c. Sodium para-aminosalicylate
d. Benzylpenicillin sodium
*e. Isoniazid
429. A patient diagnosed with viral hepatitis developed ascites, jaundice, itching, leg edemas, and dyspnea. What type of jaundice is observed in the patient?
a. Hemolytic
b. Mechanical
*c. Parenchymatous
d. Suprahepatic
e. Obstructive
430. A patient diagnosed with viral hepatitis developed ascites, jaundice, itching, leg edemas, and dyspnea. What type of jaundice is observed in the patient?
a. Mechanical
b. Suprahepatic
*c. Parenchymatous
d. Obstructive
e. Hemolytic
431. A patient diagnosed with viral hepatitis developed ascites, jaundice, itching, leg edemas, and dyspnea. What type of jaundice is observed in the patient?
a. Obstructive
*b. Parenchymatous
c. Mechanical
d. Hemolytic
e. Suprahepatic
432. A patient has a gallstone lodged in the common bile duct, which blocks bile supply to the intestine. What digestive process will be disturbed in this case?
a. Carbohydrate absorption
b. Protein digestion
c. Carbohydrate digestion
d. Protein absorption
*e. Fat digestion
433. A patient has a gallstone lodged in the common bile duct, which blocks bile supply to the intestine. What digestive process will be disturbed in this case?
a. Protein absorption
b. Carbohydrate digestion
*c. Fat digestion
d. Carbohydrate absorption
e. Protein digestion
434. A patient has a gallstone lodged in the common bile duct, which blocks bile supply to the intestine. What digestive process will be disturbed in this case?
a. Protein absorption
b. Carbohydrate digestion
c. Protein digestion
d. Carbohydrate absorption
*e. Fat digestion
435. A patient has acute pancreatitis. What is the leading link in the pathogenesis of this disease?
*a. Early activation of trypsin and elastase
b. Disturbed trophism of exocrine pancreatocytes
c. Arterial hypertension
d. Autoallergy
e. Atherosclerosis of pancreatic vessels
436. A patient has acute pancreatitis. What is the leading link in the pathogenesis of this disease?
a. Atherosclerosis of pancreatic vessels
b. Arterial hypertension
*c. Early activation of trypsin and elastase
d. Autoallergy
e. Disturbed trophism of exocrine pancreatocytes
437. A patient has acute pancreatitis. What is the leading link in the pathogenesis of this disease?
a. Disturbed trophism of exocrine pancreatocytes
b. Autoallergy
c. Atherosclerosis of pancreatic vessels
*d. Early activation of trypsin and elastase
e. Arterial hypertension
438. A patient has asked the dispensing chemist to recommend him a drug that can increase the endurance of an organism in adverse environmental conditions. The chemist recommended the following:
a. Camomile flowers infusion
b. Calendula tincture
c. Oak bark decoction
*d. Schisandra tincture
e. Eucalyptus tincture
439. A patient has asked the dispensing chemist to recommend him a drug that can increase the endurance of an organism in adverse environmental conditions. The chemist recommended the following:
a. Eucalyptus tincture
b. Camomile flowers infusion
c. Calendula tincture
*d. Schisandra tincture
e. Oak bark decoction
440. A patient has asked the dispensing chemist to recommend him a drug that can increase the endurance of an organism in adverse environmental conditions. The chemist recommended the following:
a. Oak bark decoction
b. Camomile flowers infusion
c. Calendula tincture
*d. Schisandra tincture
e. Eucalyptus tincture
441. A patient has been diagnosed with bronchial asthma. Specify the drug that can be administered for asphyxiation:
*a. Salbutamol
b. Anapriline
c. Acetylcysteine
d. Paracetamol
e. Diclofenac sodium
442. A patient has been diagnosed with bronchial asthma. Specify the drug that can be administered for asphyxiation:
*a. Salbutamol
b. Diclofenac sodium
c. Paracetamol
d. Acetylcysteine
e. Anapriline
443. A patient has been diagnosed with bronchial asthma. Specify the drug that can be administered for asphyxiation:
a. Paracetamol
b. Anapriline
*c. Salbutamol
d. Diclofenac sodium
e. Acetylcysteine
444. A patient has been diagnosed with ischemic heart disease with high cholesterol levels. What drug should be included into the patient's treatment regimen?
*a. Atorvastatin
b. Hydrochlorothiazide
c. Diclofenac sodium
d. Fentanyl
e. Celecoxib
445. A patient has been diagnosed with ischemic heart disease with high cholesterol levels. What drug should be included into the patient's treatment regimen?
a. Celecoxib
*b. Atorvastatin
c. Hydrochlorothiazide
d. Fentanyl
e. Diclofenac sodium
446. A patient has been diagnosed with ischemic heart disease with high cholesterol levels. What drug should be included into the patient's treatment regimen?
a. Celecoxib
b. Fentanyl
c. Hydrochlorothiazide
d. Diclofenac sodium
*e. Atorvastatin
447. A patient has been hospitalised with diagnosis of diabetes mellitus I type. Decreased rate of oxaloacetate forming is one of the metabolic changes present in the patient. What metabolic process is disrupted as a result?
a. Cholesterol synthesis
*b. Citric acid cycle
c. Glycolysis
d. Urea synthesis
e. Glycogen mobilization
448. A patient has been hospitalised with diagnosis of diabetes mellitus I type. Decreased rate of oxaloacetate forming is one of the metabolic changes present in the patient. What metabolic process is disrupted as a result?
a. Cholesterol synthesis
b. Urea synthesis
*c. Citric acid cycle
d. Glycogen mobilization
e. Glycolysis
449. A patient has been hospitalised with diagnosis of diabetes mellitus I type. Decreased rate of oxaloacetate forming is one of the metabolic changes present in the patient. What metabolic process is disrupted as a result?
a. Cholesterol synthesis
b. Urea synthesis
*c. Citric acid cycle
d. Glycolysis
e. Glycogen mobilization
450. A patient has been hospitalized into the infectious diseases department of a regional hospital with the provisional diagnosis of typhoid fever. What serological reaction must be carried out to confirm the diagnosis?
a. Elek test
b. Wright reaction
c. Wassermann reaction
*d. Widal test
e. Huddleson reaction
451. A patient has been hospitalized into the infectious diseases department of a regional hospital with the provisional diagnosis of typhoid fever. What serological reaction must be carried out to confirm the diagnosis?
a. Wassermann reaction
b. Huddleson reaction
c. Elek test
*d. Widal test
e. Wright reaction
452. A patient has been hospitalized into the infectious diseases department of a regional hospital with the provisional diagnosis of typhoid fever. What serological reaction must be carried out to confirm the diagnosis?
a. Wright reaction
*b. Widal test
c. Wassermann reaction
d. Huddleson reaction
e. Elek test
453. A patient has been hospitalized with signs of ascites. The doctor prescribed the patient spironolactone to enhance the diuretic effect of hydrochlorothiazide. What effect does this drug have apart from the diuretic effect?
*a. Potassium-sparing
b. Analgesic
c. Antispasmodic
d. Irritant
e. Sedative
454. A patient has been hospitalized with signs of ascites. The doctor prescribed the patient spironolactone to enhance the diuretic effect of hydrochlorothiazide. What effect does this drug have apart from the diuretic effect?
a. Analgesic
b. Antispasmodic
*c. Potassium-sparing
d. Irritant
e. Sedative
455. A patient has been hospitalized with signs of ascites. The doctor prescribed the patient spironolactone to enhance the diuretic effect of hydrochlorothiazide. What effect does this drug have apart from the diuretic effect?
a. Irritant
b. Antispasmodic
*c. Potassium-sparing
d. Analgesic
e. Sedative
456. A patient has been hospitalized with the provisional diagnosis of gas gangrene, caused by spore-forming anaerobes. What nutrient medium must be used for inoculation of the material, obtained from the patient, to isolate a pure culture and confirm the diagnosis?
*a. Kitt-Tarozzi medium
b. Meat-peptone agar, meat-peptone broth
c. Egg yolk-salt agar
d. Levin medium
e. Endo medium
457. A patient has been hospitalized with the provisional diagnosis of gas gangrene, caused by spore-forming anaerobes. What nutrient medium must be used for inoculation of the material, obtained from the patient, to isolate a pure culture and confirm the diagnosis?
a. Levin medium
b. Egg yolk-salt agar
c. Endo medium
d. Meat-peptone agar, meat-peptone broth
*e. Kitt-Tarozzi medium
458. A patient has been hospitalized with the provisional diagnosis of gas gangrene, caused by spore-forming anaerobes. What nutrient medium must be used for inoculation of the material, obtained from the patient, to isolate a pure culture and confirm the diagnosis?
a. Meat-peptone agar, meat-peptone broth
b. Endo medium
c. Egg yolk-salt agar
*d. Kitt-Tarozzi medium
e. Levin medium
459. A patient has been prescribed drug with antibacterial effect on tuberculosis mycobacteria. What drug is used in tuberculosis treatment and is pyridoxine antivitamin?
*a. Isoniazid
b. Streptomycin
c. Heparin
d. Sulfanilamide
e. Trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (Co-trimoxazole)
460. A patient has been prescribed drug with antibacterial effect on tuberculosis mycobacteria. What drug is used in tuberculosis treatment and is pyridoxine antivitamin?
a. Streptomycin
b. Trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (Co-trimoxazole)
c. Heparin
*d. Isoniazid
e. Sulfanilamide
461. A patient has been prescribed drug with antibacterial effect on tuberculosis mycobacteria. What drug is used in tuberculosis treatment and is pyridoxine antivitamin?
a. Sulfanilamide
*b. Isoniazid
c. Streptomycin
d. Heparin
e. Trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (Co-trimoxazole)
462. A patient has been prescribed oral drug to treat diarrhea. In accordance with the WHO and Pharmacopoeia requirements 1 g (ml) of drug can contain the following number of microorganisms:
a. 10 bacteria and no mold fungi
b. 1000 bacteria and 200 mold fungi
c. No bacteria and no mold fungi
d. 100 bacteria and 10 mold fungi
*e. 1000 bacteria and 100 mold fungi
463. A patient has been prescribed oral drug to treat diarrhea. In accordance with the WHO and Pharmacopoeia requirements 1 g (ml) of drug can contain the following number of microorganisms:
a. 1000 bacteria and 200 mold fungi
b. 100 bacteria and 10 mold fungi
c. 10 bacteria and no mold fungi
d. No bacteria and no mold fungi
*e. 1000 bacteria and 100 mold fungi
464. A patient has been prescribed oral drug to treat diarrhea. In accordance with the WHO and Pharmacopoeia requirements 1 g (ml) of drug can contain the following number of microorganisms:
a. No bacteria and no mold fungi
*b. 1000 bacteria and 100 mold fungi
c. 1000 bacteria and 200 mold fungi
d. 100 bacteria and 10 mold fungi
e. 10 bacteria and no mold fungi
465. A patient has been provisionally diagnosed with diabetes mellitus. What erythrocyte protein needs to be measured in this case to assess the glycemia levels in the patient?
a. Bence-Jones protein
b. C-reactive protein
c. gamma-globulin
*d. Glycated hemoglobin
e. alpha_2-globulin
466. A patient has been provisionally diagnosed with diabetes mellitus. What erythrocyte protein needs to be measured in this case to assess the glycemia levels in the patient?
a. alpha_2-globulin
b. C-reactive protein
c. gamma-globulin
*d. Glycated hemoglobin
e. Bence-Jones protein
467. A patient has been provisionally diagnosed with diabetes mellitus. What erythrocyte protein needs to be measured in this case to assess the glycemia levels in the patient?
a. gamma-globulin
*b. Glycated hemoglobin
c. alpha_2-globulin
d. Bence-Jones protein
e. C-reactive protein
468. A patient has been receiving Theophylline (inhibitor of cyclic adenosine monophosphate phosphodiesterase) for a week. What hormone can increase its action due to such treatment and cause hyperglycemia as the result?
a. Estradiol
b. Testosterone
c. Insulin
*d. Glucagon
e. Aldosterone
469. A patient has been receiving Theophylline (inhibitor of cyclic adenosine monophosphate phosphodiesterase) for a week. What hormone can increase its action due to such treatment and cause hyperglycemia as the result?
a. Insulin
*b. Glucagon
c. Aldosterone
d. Testosterone
e. Estradiol
470. A patient has been receiving Theophylline (inhibitor of cyclic adenosine monophosphate phosphodiesterase) for a week. What hormone can increase its action due to such treatment and cause hyperglycemia as the result?
a. Testosterone
b. Aldosterone
c. Insulin
*d. Glucagon
e. Estradiol
471. A patient has bradycardia, moderate hypotension, decreased basal metabolism, and edemas. What disorder is the likely cause of these signs?
a. Adrenal hypofunction
*b. Hypothyroidism
c. Hyperparathyroidism
d. Hyperthyroidism
e. Hypoparathyroidism
472. A patient has bradycardia, moderate hypotension, decreased basal metabolism, and edemas. What disorder is the likely cause of these signs?
a. Hyperthyroidism
b. Hyperparathyroidism
c. Hypoparathyroidism
*d. Hypothyroidism
e. Adrenal hypofunction
473. A patient has developed an allergic skin reaction in the form of urticaria after using an antibiotic to treat pneumonia. What antihistamine is indicated in this case?
*a. Loratadine
b. Ranitidine
c. Tannin
d. Prednisolone
e. Raunatine (Rauwolfia alkaloids)
474. A patient has developed an allergic skin reaction in the form of urticaria after using an antibiotic to treat pneumonia. What antihistamine is indicated in this case?
a. Ranitidine
b. Tannin
c. Raunatine (Rauwolfia alkaloids)
d. Prednisolone
*e. Loratadine
475. A patient has developed an allergic skin reaction in the form of urticaria after using an antibiotic to treat pneumonia. What antihistamine is indicated in this case?
a. Tannin
b. Prednisolone
c. Ranitidine
*d. Loratadine
e. Raunatine (Rauwolfia alkaloids)
476. A patient has developed anemia against the background of nonspecific ulcerative colitis. In the blood, there are hypochromia, micro- and anisocytosis, and poikilocytosis. What type of anemia can be suspected in this case?
*a. Iron deficiency
b. Sideroblastic
c. Hemolytic
d. Aplastic
e. B_12 and folate deficiency
477. A patient has developed anemia against the background of nonspecific ulcerative colitis. In the blood, there are hypochromia, micro- and anisocytosis, and poikilocytosis. What type of anemia can be suspected in this case?
a. B_12 and folate deficiency
b. Aplastic
c. Sideroblastic
d. Hemolytic
*e. Iron deficiency
478. A patient has developed anemia against the background of nonspecific ulcerative colitis. In the blood, there are hypochromia, micro- and anisocytosis, and poikilocytosis. What type of anemia can be suspected in this case?
a. Sideroblastic
b. B_12 and folate deficiency
*c. Iron deficiency
d. Aplastic
e. Hemolytic
479. A patient has developed anuria due to a severe blood loss (40% of blood volume). What is the leading mechanism of anuria development in this case?
*a. Decreased hydrostatic pressure in the  glomerular capillaries
b. Decreased pressure in the glomerular  capsule
c. Increased pressure in the glomerular  capsule
d. Decreased number of functional  glomeruli
e. Increased oncotic blood pressure
480. A patient has developed anuria due to a severe blood loss (40% of blood volume). What is the leading mechanism of anuria development in this case?
a. Decreased pressure in the glomerular  capsule
b. Increased pressure in the glomerular  capsule
c. Decreased number of functional  glomeruli
*d. Decreased hydrostatic pressure in the  glomerular capillaries
e. Increased oncotic blood pressure
481. A patient has developed anuria due to a severe blood loss (40% of blood volume). What is the leading mechanism of anuria development in this case?
a. Increased pressure in the glomerular  capsule
b. Increased oncotic blood pressure
*c. Decreased hydrostatic pressure in the  glomerular capillaries
d. Decreased pressure in the glomerular  capsule
e. Decreased number of functional  glomeruli
482. A patient has developed anuria. Blood pressure is 50/20 mm Hg. What process of uropoiesis was disturbed resulting in acute decrease of urine output?
a. Facultative reabsorption
*b. Glomerular filtration
c. -
d. Tubular secretion
e. Obligate reabsorption
483. A patient has developed anuria. Blood pressure is 50/20 mm Hg. What process of uropoiesis was disturbed resulting in acute decrease of urine output?
a. Facultative reabsorption
b. Obligate reabsorption
*c. Glomerular filtration
d. Tubular secretion
e. -
484. A patient has developed anuria. Blood pressure is 50/20 mm Hg. What process of uropoiesis was disturbed resulting in acute decrease of urine output?
a. Tubular secretion
*b. Glomerular filtration
c. Facultative reabsorption
d. -
e. Obligate reabsorption
485. A patient has developed intestinal disbacteriosis after his long-term taking of antibiotics. What drugs should be prescribed to restore microflora up to normal amount?
a. Antifungal agents
b. Interferon
c. Cephalosporines
*d. Eubiotics
e. Sulfanilamides
486. A patient has developed intestinal disbacteriosis after his long-term taking of antibiotics. What drugs should be prescribed to restore microflora up to normal amount?
a. Cephalosporines
b. Interferon
c. Sulfanilamides
d. Antifungal agents
*e. Eubiotics
487. A patient has developed intestinal disbacteriosis after his long-term taking of antibiotics. What drugs should be prescribed to restore microflora up to normal amount?
a. Interferon
*b. Eubiotics
c. Sulfanilamides
d. Antifungal agents
e. Cephalosporines
488. A patient has developed megaloblastic anemia on a background of alcoholic hepatocirrhosis. The main cause of anemia in this patient is the following vitamin deficiency:
a. Biotin
b. Pantothenic acid
*c. Folic acid
d. Lipoic acid
e. Thiamin
489. A patient has developed megaloblastic anemia on a background of alcoholic hepatocirrhosis. The main cause of anemia in this patient is the following vitamin deficiency:
a. Lipoic acid
b. Thiamin
c. Pantothenic acid
*d. Folic acid
e. Biotin
490. A patient has developed megaloblastic anemia on a background of alcoholic hepatocirrhosis. The main cause of anemia in this patient is the following vitamin deficiency:
a. Thiamin
b. Lipoic acid
c. Pantothenic acid
*d. Folic acid
e. Biotin
491. A patient has marked allergic symptoms: rashes on the body, facial edema, itching. This condition is associated with an increase in formation of a certain biogenic amine. Name this biogenic amine.
a. Cadaverine
*b. Histamine
c. Indican
d. Putrescine
e. GABA
492. A patient has marked allergic symptoms: rashes on the body, facial edema, itching. This condition is associated with an increase in formation of a certain biogenic amine. Name this biogenic amine.
a. Cadaverine
b. Putrescine
c. GABA
d. Indican
*e. Histamine
493. A patient has marked allergic symptoms: rashes on the body, facial edema, itching. This condition is associated with an increase in formation of a certain biogenic amine. Name this biogenic amine.
a. Indican
b. Putrescine
c. GABA
*d. Histamine
e. Cadaverine
494. A patient has mucosal dryness and mesopic vision disorder. What vitamin deficiency causes these symptons?
*a. A
b. C
c. E
d. P
e. D
495. A patient has mucosal dryness and mesopic vision disorder. What vitamin deficiency causes these symptons?
*a. A
b. D
c. C
d. P
e. E
496. A patient has mucosal dryness and mesopic vision disorder. What vitamin deficiency causes these symptons?
*a. A
b. E
c. D
d. C
e. P
497. A patient has periodic urticaria that manifests as blisters that the patient develops on the skin after eating red fish. The patient has been diagnosed with anaphylactic allergic reaction. In this case, an increase in the titer of a certain immunoglobulin would be detected. Name this immunoglobulin.
*a. IgE
b. IgM
c. IgD
d. IgG
e. IgA
498. A patient has periodic urticaria that manifests as blisters that the patient develops on the skin after eating red fish. The patient has been diagnosed with anaphylactic allergic reaction. In this case, an increase in the titer of a certain immunoglobulin would be detected. Name this immunoglobulin.
a. IgD
b. IgG
*c. IgE
d. IgA
e. IgM
499. A patient has periodic urticaria that manifests as blisters that the patient develops on the skin after eating red fish. The patient has been diagnosed with anaphylactic allergic reaction. In this case, an increase in the titer of a certain immunoglobulin would be detected. Name this immunoglobulin.
a. IgG
b. IgA
*c. IgE
d. IgD
e. IgM
500. A patient has pulmonary edema. What drug must be prescribed in this case to reduce the volume of circulating blood?
a. Magnesium sulfate
b. Aminazine (Chlorpromazine)
c. Nitroglycerin
*d. Furosemide
e. Metoprolol
501. A patient has pulmonary edema. What drug must be prescribed in this case to reduce the volume of circulating blood?
a. Nitroglycerin
b. Aminazine (Chlorpromazine)
*c. Furosemide
d. Metoprolol
e. Magnesium sulfate
502. A patient has pulmonary edema. What drug must be prescribed in this case to reduce the volume of circulating blood?
a. Nitroglycerin
b. Aminazine (Chlorpromazine)
c. Magnesium sulfate
*d. Furosemide
e. Metoprolol
503. A patient has thyrotoxicosis. What drug should be prescribed to this patient to suppress the synthesis of thyroid hormones?
a. L-thyroxine
b. Thyroidin
c. Parathyroidin
d. Antistrumin (Potassium iodide)
*e. Mercazolil (Thiamazole)
504. A patient has thyrotoxicosis. What drug should be prescribed to this patient to suppress the synthesis of thyroid hormones?
a. Parathyroidin
b. L-thyroxine
*c. Mercazolil (Thiamazole)
d. Thyroidin
e. Antistrumin (Potassium iodide)
505. A patient has thyrotoxicosis. What drug should be prescribed to this patient to suppress the synthesis of thyroid hormones?
a. Thyroidin
b. Parathyroidin
c. L-thyroxine
*d. Mercazolil (Thiamazole)
e. Antistrumin (Potassium iodide)
506. A patient has toxic pulmonary edema. What drug must be used for emergency aid in this case?
*a. Mannitol
b. Indapamide
c. Spironolactone
d. Diacarb (Acetazolamide)
e. Hydrochlorothiazide
507. A patient has toxic pulmonary edema. What drug must be used for emergency aid in this case?
a. Diacarb (Acetazolamide)
*b. Mannitol
c. Spironolactone
d. Indapamide
e. Hydrochlorothiazide
508. A patient has toxic pulmonary edema. What drug must be used for emergency aid in this case?
a. Hydrochlorothiazide
b. Indapamide
c. Spironolactone
*d. Mannitol
e. Diacarb (Acetazolamide)
509. A patient in a state of psychosis was prescribed the following antipsychotic:
a. Cyclodol (Trihexyphenidyl)
*b. Aminazine (Chlorpromazine)
c. Phenobarbital
d. Caffeine
e. Diazepam
510. A patient in a state of psychosis was prescribed the following antipsychotic:
a. Cyclodol (Trihexyphenidyl)
b. Phenobarbital
c. Caffeine
d. Diazepam
*e. Aminazine (Chlorpromazine)
511. A patient in a state of psychosis was prescribed the following antipsychotic:
a. Diazepam
*b. Aminazine (Chlorpromazine)
c. Caffeine
d. Cyclodol (Trihexyphenidyl)
e. Phenobarbital
512. A patient in the state of ketoacidotic coma presents with loud rapid respiration: labored expiration with tension of expiratory muscles occurs after deep inspiration. Name this type of pathologic respiration:
a. Biot's
b. Gasping
*c. Kussmaul's
d. Cheyne-Stokes'
e. Stenotic
513. A patient in the state of ketoacidotic coma presents with loud rapid respiration: labored expiration with tension of expiratory muscles occurs after deep inspiration. Name this type of pathologic respiration:
a. Cheyne-Stokes'
b. Gasping
*c. Kussmaul's
d. Stenotic
e. Biot's
514. A patient in the state of ketoacidotic coma presents with loud rapid respiration: labored expiration with tension of expiratory muscles occurs after deep inspiration. Name this type of pathologic respiration:
a. Stenotic
b. Biot's
*c. Kussmaul's
d. Gasping
e. Cheyne-Stokes'
515. A patient is being consulted by the family doctor. He asks what role cholesterol plays in the body. The doctor explains that cholesterol is a constituent part of the cell membranes and is necessary for synthesis of various substances, among which there are following hormones:
a. Amino acid derivatives
b. Peptide hormones
c. Protein hormones
*d. Steroid hormones
e. Eicosanoids
516. A patient is being consulted by the family doctor. He asks what role cholesterol plays in the body. The doctor explains that cholesterol is a constituent part of the cell membranes and is necessary for synthesis of various substances, among which there are following hormones:
a. Peptide hormones
b. Eicosanoids
c. Amino acid derivatives
*d. Steroid hormones
e. Protein hormones
517. A patient is being consulted by the family doctor. He asks what role cholesterol plays in the body. The doctor explains that cholesterol is a constituent part of the cell membranes and is necessary for synthesis of various substances, among which there are following hormones:
a. Protein hormones
b. Peptide hormones
*c. Steroid hormones
d. Amino acid derivatives
e. Eicosanoids
518. A patient is diagnosed with acute pancreatitis. For diagnostic purpose it is necessary to measure the activity of the following enzyme in the patient's blood:
a. Aldolase
b. Creatine kinase
*c. Amylase
d. LDH
e. Pepsin
519. A patient is diagnosed with acute pancreatitis. For diagnostic purpose it is necessary to measure the activity of the following enzyme in the patient's blood:
a. Aldolase
b. LDH
c. Creatine kinase
*d. Amylase
e. Pepsin
520. A patient is diagnosed with acute pancreatitis. For diagnostic purpose it is necessary to measure the activity of the following enzyme in the patient's blood:
a. Creatine kinase
b. Aldolase
*c. Amylase
d. LDH
e. Pepsin
521. A patient is pale, has goose bumps and chills. What stage of fever is it characteristic of?
a. Continuous fever
b. Temperature decrease
c. Latent stage
*d. Temperature increase
e. Compensation
522. A patient is pale, has goose bumps and chills. What stage of fever is it characteristic of?
a. Latent stage
b. Continuous fever
c. Temperature decrease
*d. Temperature increase
e. Compensation
523. A patient is pale, has goose bumps and chills. What stage of fever is it characteristic of?
a. Temperature decrease
b. Compensation
c. Continuous fever
*d. Temperature increase
e. Latent stage
524. A patient presents with inflammation of the nasal mucosa: redness, edema, profuse mucus discharge from the nasal passages. This clinical presentation corresponds with the following stage of inflammation:
*a. Exudation
b. Alteration
c. Proliferation
d. Immunologic
e. Biochemical
525. A patient presents with inflammation of the nasal mucosa: redness, edema, profuse mucus discharge from the nasal passages. This clinical presentation corresponds with the following stage of inflammation:
*a. Exudation
b. Biochemical
c. Immunologic
d. Proliferation
e. Alteration
526. A patient presents with inflammation of the nasal mucosa: redness, edema, profuse mucus discharge from the nasal passages. This clinical presentation corresponds with the following stage of inflammation:
a. Proliferation
b. Immunologic
c. Biochemical
*d. Exudation
e. Alteration
527. A patient presents with intestinal obstruction and a decrease in the bactericidal effect of gastric juice, which contributes to the growth of putrefactive microflora. In this case, increased excretion of a certain substance can be observed in urine. Name this substance.
*a. Indican
b. Glucose
c. Lactic acid
d. Creatine
e. Protein
528. A patient presents with intestinal obstruction and a decrease in the bactericidal effect of gastric juice, which contributes to the growth of putrefactive microflora. In this case, increased excretion of a certain substance can be observed in urine. Name this substance.
a. Glucose
*b. Indican
c. Creatine
d. Protein
e. Lactic acid
529. A patient presents with intestinal obstruction and a decrease in the bactericidal effect of gastric juice, which contributes to the growth of putrefactive microflora. In this case, increased excretion of a certain substance can be observed in urine. Name this substance.
a. Glucose
b. Protein
c. Creatine
d. Lactic acid
*e. Indican
530. A patient presents with persistent fever, with the difference between evening and morning temperature not exceeding 1^oC) What type of fever curve is present in this patient?
*a. Continuous
b. Hectic
c. Remittent
d. Recurrent
e. Intermittent
531. A patient presents with persistent fever, with the difference between evening and morning temperature not exceeding 1^oC) What type of fever curve is present in this patient?
a. Intermittent
*b. Continuous
c. Recurrent
d. Hectic
e. Remittent
532. A patient presents with persistent fever, with the difference between evening and morning temperature not exceeding 1^oC) What type of fever curve is present in this patient?
a. Remittent
b. Recurrent
*c. Continuous
d. Hectic
e. Intermittent
533. A patient presents with temperature 38.5-39.5^oC, nausea, vomiting, and stomachache. Poisoning with salts of heavy metals is diagnosed. What drug should be prescribed as an antidote in this case?
*a. Unithiol
b. Validol (Menthyl isovalerate)
c. Phenolphthalein
d. Pentazocine
e. Bromhexine
534. A patient presents with temperature 38.5-39.5^oC, nausea, vomiting, and stomachache. Poisoning with salts of heavy metals is diagnosed. What drug should be prescribed as an antidote in this case?
a. Phenolphthalein
b. Pentazocine
*c. Unithiol
d. Validol (Menthyl isovalerate)
e. Bromhexine
535. A patient presents with temperature 38.5-39.5^oC, nausea, vomiting, and stomachache. Poisoning with salts of heavy metals is diagnosed. What drug should be prescribed as an antidote in this case?
a. Phenolphthalein
b. Validol (Menthyl isovalerate)
*c. Unithiol
d. Bromhexine
e. Pentazocine
536. A patient suffers from Down's disease that manifests as mental retardation, shortness of stature, pathologically short fingers and toes, and eyes with mongoloid slant. Karyotype analysis revealed trisomy 21. What group of diseases does this pathology belong to?
*a. Chromosomal disorders
b. Fetopathy
c. Blastopathy
d. Molecular genetic disease
e. Gametopathy
537. A patient suffers from Down's disease that manifests as mental retardation, shortness of stature, pathologically short fingers and toes, and eyes with mongoloid slant. Karyotype analysis revealed trisomy 21. What group of diseases does this pathology belong to?
*a. Chromosomal disorders
b. Molecular genetic disease
c. Fetopathy
d. Gametopathy
e. Blastopathy
538. A patient suffers from Down's disease that manifests as mental retardation, shortness of stature, pathologically short fingers and toes, and eyes with mongoloid slant. Karyotype analysis revealed trisomy 21. What group of diseases does this pathology belong to?
a. Gametopathy
b. Molecular genetic disease
c. Fetopathy
*d. Chromosomal disorders
e. Blastopathy
539. A patient suffers from block of cytochrome oxidase enzyme caused by cyanide poisoning. What type of hypoxia is developed in this case?
*a. Tissue
b. Circulatory
c. Stagnant
d. Respiratory
e. Hemic
540. A patient suffers from block of cytochrome oxidase enzyme caused by cyanide poisoning. What type of hypoxia is developed in this case?
*a. Tissue
b. Respiratory
c. Hemic
d. Circulatory
e. Stagnant
541. A patient suffers from block of cytochrome oxidase enzyme caused by cyanide poisoning. What type of hypoxia is developed in this case?
a. Hemic
b. Stagnant
c. Respiratory
d. Circulatory
*e. Tissue
542. A patient suffers from hyperchromic B_12-deficiency anemia. What vitamin preparation should be prescribed in this case?
a. Retinol acetate
*b. Cyanocobalamin
c. Vicasol (Menadione)
d. Thiamine chloride
e. Riboflavin
543. A patient suffers from hyperchromic B_12-deficiency anemia. What vitamin preparation should be prescribed in this case?
a. Retinol acetate
b. Riboflavin
c. Thiamine chloride
d. Vicasol (Menadione)
*e. Cyanocobalamin
544. A patient suffers from hyperchromic B_12-deficiency anemia. What vitamin preparation should be prescribed in this case?
a. Riboflavin
b. Thiamine chloride
c. Retinol acetate
*d. Cyanocobalamin
e. Vicasol (Menadione)
545. A patient undergoes chemotherapy with 5-fluorouracil that is a competitive inhibitor of thymidilate synthase. What process is inhibited by this drug?
*a. Thymidine monophosphate synthesis
b. Purine nucleotides disintegration
c. Glucose synthesis
d. Adenosine triphosphate synthesis
e. Purine nucleotides salvage
546. A patient undergoes chemotherapy with 5-fluorouracil that is a competitive inhibitor of thymidilate synthase. What process is inhibited by this drug?
a. Adenosine triphosphate synthesis
*b. Thymidine monophosphate synthesis
c. Glucose synthesis
d. Purine nucleotides salvage
e. Purine nucleotides disintegration
547. A patient undergoes chemotherapy with 5-fluorouracil that is a competitive inhibitor of thymidilate synthase. What process is inhibited by this drug?
a. Glucose synthesis
b. Purine nucleotides salvage
c. Purine nucleotides disintegration
*d. Thymidine monophosphate synthesis
e. Adenosine triphosphate synthesis
548. A patient was admitted to a hospital in a state of hypoglycemic coma. It occurs at the following level of blood glucose:
*a. 2,5 mmol/l or less
b. 3,3 mmol/l
c. 4,5 mmol/l
d. 5,5 mmol/l
e. 4,0 mmol/l
549. A patient was admitted to a hospital in a state of hypoglycemic coma. It occurs at the following level of blood glucose:
a. 4,0 mmol/l
*b. 2,5 mmol/l or less
c. 5,5 mmol/l
d. 4,5 mmol/l
e. 3,3 mmol/l
550. A patient was admitted to a hospital in a state of hypoglycemic coma. It occurs at the following level of blood glucose:
a. 4,5 mmol/l
b. 3,3 mmol/l
c. 5,5 mmol/l
*d. 2,5 mmol/l or less
e. 4,0 mmol/l
551. A patient was found to have a tumor of the pancreatic head, which is accompanied by the impaired patency of the common bile duct. Blood test will reveal an increase in the following substance level:
a. Hemoglobin
b. Urea
*c. Bilirubin
d. Adrenaline
e. Insulin
552. A patient was found to have a tumor of the pancreatic head, which is accompanied by the impaired patency of the common bile duct. Blood test will reveal an increase in the following substance level:
a. Hemoglobin
b. Urea
*c. Bilirubin
d. Insulin
e. Adrenaline
553. A patient was found to have a tumor of the pancreatic head, which is accompanied by the impaired patency of the common bile duct. Blood test will reveal an increase in the following substance level:
a. Urea
b. Adrenaline
c. Hemoglobin
d. Insulin
*e. Bilirubin
554. A patient was prescribed doxycycline hydrochloride for etiopathogenetic treatment of an infectious process. In this case the patient should be warned about the following side efect:
*a. Photosensitization
b. Peripheral edemas
c. Arterial hypertension
d. Uricosuria
e. Hypercapnia
555. A patient was prescribed doxycycline hydrochloride for etiopathogenetic treatment of an infectious process. In this case the patient should be warned about the following side efect:
a. Arterial hypertension
b. Uricosuria
c. Peripheral edemas
*d. Photosensitization
e. Hypercapnia
556. A patient was prescribed doxycycline hydrochloride for etiopathogenetic treatment of an infectious process. In this case the patient should be warned about the following side efect:
a. Uricosuria
*b. Photosensitization
c. Hypercapnia
d. Peripheral edemas
e. Arterial hypertension
557. A patient was prescribed losartan for treatment of arterial hypertension. What mechanism of action does this drug have?
a. Inhibition of angiotensin-converting enzyme
*b. Angiotensin-receptor blockade
c. Inhibition of phosphodiesterase
d. Calcium channel blockade
e. Activation of central alpha-adrenoceptors
558. A patient was prescribed losartan for treatment of arterial hypertension. What mechanism of action does this drug have?
a. Inhibition of phosphodiesterase
*b. Angiotensin-receptor blockade
c. Calcium channel blockade
d. Activation of central alpha-adrenoceptors
e. Inhibition of angiotensin-converting enzyme
559. A patient was prescribed losartan for treatment of arterial hypertension. What mechanism of action does this drug have?
a. Inhibition of phosphodiesterase
b. Inhibition of angiotensin-converting enzyme
*c. Angiotensin-receptor blockade
d. Calcium channel blockade
e. Activation of central alpha-adrenoceptors
560. A patient was taken to a hospital with acute food poisoning caused by home-made canned mushrooms. The product analysis revealed some microorganisms that develop only in the absence of oxygen. What microorganisms caused the poisoning?
a. Capnophiles
b. Obligate aerobes
*c. Obligate anaerobes
d. Microaerophiles
e. Facultative anaerobes
561. A patient was taken to a hospital with acute food poisoning caused by home-made canned mushrooms. The product analysis revealed some microorganisms that develop only in the absence of oxygen. What microorganisms caused the poisoning?
a. Facultative anaerobes
b. Microaerophiles
c. Obligate aerobes
d. Capnophiles
*e. Obligate anaerobes
562. A patient was taken to a hospital with acute food poisoning caused by home-made canned mushrooms. The product analysis revealed some microorganisms that develop only in the absence of oxygen. What microorganisms caused the poisoning?
a. Obligate aerobes
b. Capnophiles
*c. Obligate anaerobes
d. Microaerophiles
e. Facultative anaerobes
563. A patient was urgently brought to the infectious diseases hospital. The patient developed severe neurologic disorders 4 hours after he had eaten canned fish. A filtrate was prepared from the remains of this food product and given intraperitoneally to a guinea pig. 3 hours later the animal died. What disease can be suspected?
a. Salmonellosis
b. Q fever
*c. Botulism
d. Typhoid fever
e. Brucellosis
564. A patient was urgently brought to the infectious diseases hospital. The patient developed severe neurologic disorders 4 hours after he had eaten canned fish. A filtrate was prepared from the remains of this food product and given intraperitoneally to a guinea pig. 3 hours later the animal died. What disease can be suspected?
a. Salmonellosis
b. Typhoid fever
*c. Botulism
d. Q fever
e. Brucellosis
565. A patient was urgently brought to the infectious diseases hospital. The patient developed severe neurologic disorders 4 hours after he had eaten canned fish. A filtrate was prepared from the remains of this food product and given intraperitoneally to a guinea pig. 3 hours later the animal died. What disease can be suspected?
a. Typhoid fever
*b. Botulism
c. Salmonellosis
d. Q fever
e. Brucellosis
566. A patient who had been suffering from peptic ulcer disease of the stomach for a long time has cachexia, pallor, weakness, loss of appetite, and aversion to meat products. Biopsy of the gastric mucosa detected cellular anaplasia. What pathology can be characterized by such symptoms?
*a. Malignant gastric tumor
b. Ulcer penetration
c. Benign gastric tumor
d. Gastric polyposis
e. Hypertrophic gastritis
567. A patient who had been suffering from peptic ulcer disease of the stomach for a long time has cachexia, pallor, weakness, loss of appetite, and aversion to meat products. Biopsy of the gastric mucosa detected cellular anaplasia. What pathology can be characterized by such symptoms?
a. Benign gastric tumor
*b. Malignant gastric tumor
c. Hypertrophic gastritis
d. Gastric polyposis
e. Ulcer penetration
568. A patient who had been suffering from peptic ulcer disease of the stomach for a long time has cachexia, pallor, weakness, loss of appetite, and aversion to meat products. Biopsy of the gastric mucosa detected cellular anaplasia. What pathology can be characterized by such symptoms?
a. Hypertrophic gastritis
b. Ulcer penetration
c. Benign gastric tumor
d. Gastric polyposis
*e. Malignant gastric tumor
569. A patient who was receiving an indirect anticoagulant, warfarin, has taken acetylsalicylic acid to treat elevated body temperature. This combination of drugs is dangerous due to increased risk of:
*a. Hemorrhage
b. Osteoporosis
c. Neurotoxicity
d. Dysbiosis
e. Cardiotoxicity
570. A patient who was receiving an indirect anticoagulant, warfarin, has taken acetylsalicylic acid to treat elevated body temperature. This combination of drugs is dangerous due to increased risk of:
a. Cardiotoxicity
b. Dysbiosis
*c. Hemorrhage
d. Osteoporosis
e. Neurotoxicity
571. A patient who was receiving an indirect anticoagulant, warfarin, has taken acetylsalicylic acid to treat elevated body temperature. This combination of drugs is dangerous due to increased risk of:
a. Dysbiosis
*b. Hemorrhage
c. Osteoporosis
d. Cardiotoxicity
e. Neurotoxicity
572. A patient with a cranial trauma has regularly recurring epileptiform seizures. In this case, disturbed metabolism of a certain biogenic amine can be observed. Name this biogenic amine.
a. Adrenaline
*b. GABA
c. Cadaverine
d. Putrescine
e. Indole
573. A patient with a cranial trauma has regularly recurring epileptiform seizures. In this case, disturbed metabolism of a certain biogenic amine can be observed. Name this biogenic amine.
a. Indole
b. Putrescine
*c. GABA
d. Cadaverine
e. Adrenaline
574. A patient with a cranial trauma has regularly recurring epileptiform seizures. In this case, disturbed metabolism of a certain biogenic amine can be observed. Name this biogenic amine.
a. Putrescine
*b. GABA
c. Adrenaline
d. Indole
e. Cadaverine
575. A patient with a diagnosis of drug poisoning has been admitted to a resuscitation department. The patient is in grave condition. Respiration is rapid, superficial, with periods of apnea (Biot's respiration). What was the main cause of the development of periodic breathing in the patient?
a. Diminished chest mobility
*b. Inhibition of the respiratory center function
c. Pulmonary dysfunction
d. Impaired function of the neuromuscular system
e. Impaired function of spinal cord motoneurons
576. A patient with a diagnosis of drug poisoning has been admitted to a resuscitation department. The patient is in grave condition. Respiration is rapid, superficial, with periods of apnea (Biot's respiration). What was the main cause of the development of periodic breathing in the patient?
a. Impaired function of spinal cord motoneurons
*b. Inhibition of the respiratory center function
c. Diminished chest mobility
d. Pulmonary dysfunction
e. Impaired function of the neuromuscular system
577. A patient with a diagnosis of drug poisoning has been admitted to a resuscitation department. The patient is in grave condition. Respiration is rapid, superficial, with periods of apnea (Biot's respiration). What was the main cause of the development of periodic breathing in the patient?
a. Pulmonary dysfunction
b. Impaired function of the neuromuscular system
c. Impaired function of spinal cord motoneurons
d. Diminished chest mobility
*e. Inhibition of the respiratory center function
578. A patient with a hypertensive crisis was administered magnesium sulfate, which resulted in a sharp drop of the patient's blood pressure. What drug can be used in this case to eliminate the side effects of magnesium sulfate?
a. Potassium chloride
*b. Calcium chloride
c. Trilon B (EDTA disodium salt)
d. Sodium sulfate
e. Sodium bromide
579. A patient with a hypertensive crisis was administered magnesium sulfate, which resulted in a sharp drop of the patient's blood pressure. What drug can be used in this case to eliminate the side effects of magnesium sulfate?
a. Potassium chloride
b. Trilon B (EDTA disodium salt)
c. Sodium sulfate
*d. Calcium chloride
e. Sodium bromide
580. A patient with a hypertensive crisis was administered magnesium sulfate, which resulted in a sharp drop of the patient's blood pressure. What drug can be used in this case to eliminate the side effects of magnesium sulfate?
a. Sodium sulfate
b. Sodium bromide
c. Potassium chloride
*d. Calcium chloride
e. Trilon B (EDTA disodium salt)
581. A patient with a joint disorder was prescribed an ointment that contains as its active substance a certain glycosaminoglycan that is the most important component of cartilage. Name this glycosaminoglycan:
a. Glycogen
*b. Chondroitin sulfate
c. Arabinose
d. Starch
e. Heparin
582. A patient with a joint disorder was prescribed an ointment that contains as its active substance a certain glycosaminoglycan that is the most important component of cartilage. Name this glycosaminoglycan:
a. Glycogen
b. Heparin
c. Arabinose
*d. Chondroitin sulfate
e. Starch
583. A patient with a joint disorder was prescribed an ointment that contains as its active substance a certain glycosaminoglycan that is the most important component of cartilage. Name this glycosaminoglycan:
a. Heparin
b. Glycogen
c. Starch
d. Arabinose
*e. Chondroitin sulfate
584. A patient with a malignant tumor suffers from significant weight loss and exhaustion, caused by a certain substance that inhibits the hunger center and stimulates catabolism. Name this substance.
a. Glucagon
b. Insulin
*c. Cachexin
d. Aldosterone
e. Somatotropin
585. A patient with a malignant tumor suffers from significant weight loss and exhaustion, caused by a certain substance that inhibits the hunger center and stimulates catabolism. Name this substance.
a. Glucagon
b. Somatotropin
c. Insulin
d. Aldosterone
*e. Cachexin
586. A patient with a malignant tumor suffers from significant weight loss and exhaustion, caused by a certain substance that inhibits the hunger center and stimulates catabolism. Name this substance.
a. Insulin
*b. Cachexin
c. Glucagon
d. Somatotropin
e. Aldosterone
587. A patient with a small cut on the palm came to the dispensing chemist. What antiseptic would be advisable in this case?
*a. Hydrogen peroxide
b. Flemoxin (Amoxicillin)
c. Lidocaine hydrochloride
d. Ketoconazole
e. Doxycycline hydrochloride
588. A patient with a small cut on the palm came to the dispensing chemist. What antiseptic would be advisable in this case?
a. Doxycycline hydrochloride
*b. Hydrogen peroxide
c. Flemoxin (Amoxicillin)
d. Lidocaine hydrochloride
e. Ketoconazole
589. A patient with a small cut on the palm came to the dispensing chemist. What antiseptic would be advisable in this case?
a. Ketoconazole
b. Doxycycline hydrochloride
c. Lidocaine hydrochloride
d. Flemoxin (Amoxicillin)
*e. Hydrogen peroxide
590. A patient with acute cardiac failure was prescribed an adrenoceptor agonist. Name this drug:
a. Corglycon (Convallariae glycoside)
b. Metoprolol
c. Digoxin
*d. Dobutamine
e. Salbutamol
591. A patient with acute cardiac failure was prescribed an adrenoceptor agonist. Name this drug:
a. Metoprolol
b. Corglycon (Convallariae glycoside)
c. Salbutamol
d. Digoxin
*e. Dobutamine
592. A patient with acute cardiac failure was prescribed an adrenoceptor agonist. Name this drug:
a. Metoprolol
b. Digoxin
c. Corglycon (Convallariae glycoside)
d. Salbutamol
*e. Dobutamine
593. A patient with acute cardiac infarction was undergoing anticoagulant therapy with inhibitor of antithrombin III that prevents intravascular blood clotting. Name the compound with anticoagulating effect:
a. Chondroitin sulfate
*b. Heparin
c. Hyaluronic acid
d. Tetracycline
e. Histamine
594. A patient with acute cardiac infarction was undergoing anticoagulant therapy with inhibitor of antithrombin III that prevents intravascular blood clotting. Name the compound with anticoagulating effect:
a. Histamine
b. Hyaluronic acid
c. Tetracycline
*d. Heparin
e. Chondroitin sulfate
595. A patient with acute myocardial infarction received anticoagulation therapy. What compound will have anticoagulation effect?
a. Chondroitin sulfate
b. Keratan sulfate
*c. Heparin
d. Dermatan sulfate
e. Hyaluronic acid
596. A patient with acute myocardial infarction received anticoagulation therapy. What compound will have anticoagulation effect?
a. Dermatan sulfate
b. Keratan sulfate
*c. Heparin
d. Chondroitin sulfate
e. Hyaluronic acid
597. A patient with acute myocardial infarction received anticoagulation therapy. What compound will have anticoagulation effect?
a. Hyaluronic acid
b. Chondroitin sulfate
*c. Heparin
d. Dermatan sulfate
e. Keratan sulfate
598. A patient with acute renal failure in the polyuria stage has azotemia that not only did not decrease, but continues to deteriorate. What caused polyuria in this case?
a. Increasd filtration
*b. Decreased reabsorption
c. Increased secretion
d. Decreased filtration
e. Increased reabsorption
599. A patient with acute renal failure in the polyuria stage has azotemia that not only did not decrease, but continues to deteriorate. What caused polyuria in this case?
a. Increased reabsorption
b. Increased secretion
*c. Decreased reabsorption
d. Increasd filtration
e. Decreased filtration
600. A patient with acute renal failure in the polyuria stage has azotemia that not only did not decrease, but continues to deteriorate. What caused polyuria in this case?
a. Increased secretion
b. Increasd filtration
*c. Decreased reabsorption
d. Decreased filtration
e. Increased reabsorption
601. A patient with allergic dermatitis came to the hospital. What anti-inflammatory and anti-allergic drug must be prescribed in this case?
a. Ethamide
b. Insulin
c. Retabolil (Nandrolone)
*d. Prednisolone
e. Oxytocin
602. A patient with allergic dermatitis came to the hospital. What anti-inflammatory and anti-allergic drug must be prescribed in this case?
a. Retabolil (Nandrolone)
*b. Prednisolone
c. Ethamide
d. Insulin
e. Oxytocin
603. A patient with allergic dermatitis came to the hospital. What anti-inflammatory and anti-allergic drug must be prescribed in this case?
a. Retabolil (Nandrolone)
b. Ethamide
*c. Prednisolone
d. Oxytocin
e. Insulin
604. A patient with arterial hypertension has been taking a beta-adrenergic blocker for a long time. When his condition improved he abruptly stopped taking the drug, which resulted in sharp elevation of his blood pressure. Name this type of therapy complication:
a. Bradycardia
b. Drug tolerance
c. Dysbiosis
*d. Withdrawal syndrome
e. Bronchospasm
605. A patient with arterial hypertension has been taking a beta-adrenergic blocker for a long time. When his condition improved he abruptly stopped taking the drug, which resulted in sharp elevation of his blood pressure. Name this type of therapy complication:
a. Drug tolerance
b. Bradycardia
*c. Withdrawal syndrome
d. Bronchospasm
e. Dysbiosis
606. A patient with arterial hypertension has been taking a beta-adrenergic blocker for a long time. When his condition improved he abruptly stopped taking the drug, which resulted in sharp elevation of his blood pressure. Name this type of therapy complication:
a. Drug tolerance
b. Bronchospasm
c. Bradycardia
d. Dysbiosis
*e. Withdrawal syndrome
607. A patient with arthritis of the knee had been prescribed a certain drug for pain management. With time this drug provoked development of peptic ulcer disease of the stomach in this patient. Name this drug:
a. Fentanyl
*b. Diclofenac sodium
c. Diazepam
d. Novocaine
e. Phenobarbital
608. A patient with arthritis of the knee had been prescribed a certain drug for pain management. With time this drug provoked development of peptic ulcer disease of the stomach in this patient. Name this drug:
a. Fentanyl
b. Diazepam
c. Novocaine
d. Phenobarbital
*e. Diclofenac sodium
609. A patient with arthritis of the knee had been prescribed a certain drug for pain management. With time this drug provoked development of peptic ulcer disease of the stomach in this patient. Name this drug:
a. Phenobarbital
b. Fentanyl
c. Diazepam
d. Novocaine
*e. Diclofenac sodium
610. A patient with atherosclerosis was prescribed an antiatherosclerotic agent. Name this drug:
*a. Fenofibrate
b. Dexamethasone
c. Piracetam
d. Ascorbic acid
e. Butadion (Phenylbutazone)
611. A patient with atherosclerosis was prescribed an antiatherosclerotic agent. Name this drug:
a. Dexamethasone
*b. Fenofibrate
c. Ascorbic acid
d. Butadion (Phenylbutazone)
e. Piracetam
612. A patient with atherosclerosis was prescribed an antiatherosclerotic agent. Name this drug:
a. Piracetam
b. Butadion (Phenylbutazone)
c. Ascorbic acid
d. Dexamethasone
*e. Fenofibrate
613. A patient with bronchial asthma and pulmonary emphysema presents with dyspnea, sensation of lack of air. What type of hypoxia does this patient have?
*a. Respiratory
b. Circulatory
c. Hemic
d. Exogenic
e. Tissue
614. A patient with bronchial asthma and pulmonary emphysema presents with dyspnea, sensation of lack of air. What type of hypoxia does this patient have?
a. Circulatory
*b. Respiratory
c. Hemic
d. Tissue
e. Exogenic
615. A patient with bronchial asthma and pulmonary emphysema presents with dyspnea, sensation of lack of air. What type of hypoxia does this patient have?
a. Tissue
b. Hemic
*c. Respiratory
d. Exogenic
e. Circulatory
616. A patient with bronchial asthma had been prescribed salbutamol, which led to disappearance of bronchiospasm symptoms. It happened due to stimulation of:
*a. beta_2-adrenoreceptors
b. beta_1-adrenoreceptors
c. Muscarinic acetylcholine receptors
d. Acetylcholine synthesis
e. alpha_1-adrenoreceptors
617. A patient with bronchial asthma had been prescribed salbutamol, which led to disappearance of bronchiospasm symptoms. It happened due to stimulation of:
a. alpha_1-adrenoreceptors
*b. beta_2-adrenoreceptors
c. Muscarinic acetylcholine receptors
d. beta_1-adrenoreceptors
e. Acetylcholine synthesis
618. A patient with bronchial asthma had been prescribed salbutamol, which led to disappearance of bronchiospasm symptoms. It happened due to stimulation of:
a. beta_1-adrenoreceptors
b. Muscarinic acetylcholine receptors
c. Acetylcholine synthesis
*d. beta_2-adrenoreceptors
e. alpha_1-adrenoreceptors
619. A patient with bronchial asthma was prescribed a drug to stop an attack of the disease. The drug's mechanism of action is based on stimulation of beta_2-adrenergic receptors primarily. Name this drug:
a. Clophelin (Clonidine)
b. Epinephrine hydrochloride
c. Isadrine (Isoprenaline)
d. Droperidol
*e. Salbutamol
620. A patient with bronchial asthma was prescribed a drug to stop an attack of the disease. The drug's mechanism of action is based on stimulation of beta_2-adrenergic receptors primarily. Name this drug:
a. Epinephrine hydrochloride
b. Clophelin (Clonidine)
*c. Salbutamol
d. Droperidol
e. Isadrine (Isoprenaline)
621. A patient with bronchial asthma was prescribed a drug to stop an attack of the disease. The drug's mechanism of action is based on stimulation of beta_2-adrenergic receptors primarily. Name this drug:
a. Isadrine (Isoprenaline)
b. Droperidol
*c. Salbutamol
d. Clophelin (Clonidine)
e. Epinephrine hydrochloride
622. A patient with bronchial asthma was prescribed a drug with the mechanism of action that is primarily based on the stimulation of beta_2 adrenergic receptors. Name this drug:
*a. Salbutamol
b. Adrenaline hydrochloride
c. Droperidol
d. Clonidine
e. Isadrine (Isoprenaline)
623. A patient with bronchial asthma was prescribed a drug with the mechanism of action that is primarily based on the stimulation of beta_2 adrenergic receptors. Name this drug:
a. Adrenaline hydrochloride
b. Isadrine (Isoprenaline)
c. Clonidine
d. Droperidol
*e. Salbutamol
624. A patient with bronchial asthma was prescribed a drug with the mechanism of action that is primarily based on the stimulation of beta_2 adrenergic receptors. Name this drug:
a. Droperidol
b. Adrenaline hydrochloride
c. Clonidine
d. Isadrine (Isoprenaline)
*e. Salbutamol
625. A patient with bronchitis was taking doxycycline hydrochloride. What side effects can develop in the patient after the patient has been taking this drug for some time?
a. Euphoria, tolerance
b. Hypotension, vertigo
*c. Diarrhea, hepatitis
d. Withdrawal, dependence
e. Hypertension, arrhythmia
626. A patient with bronchitis was taking doxycycline hydrochloride. What side effects can develop in the patient after the patient has been taking this drug for some time?
a. Hypertension, arrhythmia
b. Withdrawal, dependence
*c. Diarrhea, hepatitis
d. Euphoria, tolerance
e. Hypotension, vertigo
627. A patient with bronchitis was taking doxycycline hydrochloride. What side effects can develop in the patient after the patient has been taking this drug for some time?
a. Hypotension, vertigo
b. Hypertension, arrhythmia
*c. Diarrhea, hepatitis
d. Withdrawal, dependence
e. Euphoria, tolerance
628. A patient with chronic constipation has been prescribed bisacodyl. After 3 weeks of treatment, the patient noticed a reduction of laxative effect. This is caused by the development of the following side-effect:
*a. Habituation
b. Dysbacteriosis
c. Sensibilization
d. Cumulation
e. Dependence
629. A patient with chronic constipation has been prescribed bisacodyl. After 3 weeks of treatment, the patient noticed a reduction of laxative effect. This is caused by the development of the following side-effect:
a. Cumulation
b. Dependence
c. Sensibilization
*d. Habituation
e. Dysbacteriosis
630. A patient with chronic constipation has been prescribed bisacodyl. After 3 weeks of treatment, the patient noticed a reduction of laxative effect. This is caused by the development of the following side-effect:
a. Sensibilization
*b. Habituation
c. Dysbacteriosis
d. Dependence
e. Cumulation
631. A patient with current coronary heart disease who has had two  myocardial infarctions of left ventricular wall presents with bubbling breathing and dyspnea. Pulmonary auscultation reveals moist crackles. What kind of heart failure is it?
a. Compensated
b. Subcompensated
*c. Left ventricular
d. Combined
e. Right ventricular
632. A patient with current coronary heart disease who has had two  myocardial infarctions of left ventricular wall presents with bubbling breathing and dyspnea. Pulmonary auscultation reveals moist crackles. What kind of heart failure is it?
a. Right ventricular
b. Subcompensated
*c. Left ventricular
d. Compensated
e. Combined
633. A patient with current coronary heart disease who has had two  myocardial infarctions of left ventricular wall presents with bubbling breathing and dyspnea. Pulmonary auscultation reveals moist crackles. What kind of heart failure is it?
a. Subcompensated
*b. Left ventricular
c. Combined
d. Compensated
e. Right ventricular
634. A patient with diabetes mellitus presents with thirst, polyuria, and dry skin and mucosa. These signs are caused by the elevated levels of the following substance in the patient's blood:
a. Adrenaline
*b. Glucose
c. Cholesterol
d. Phenylalanine
e. Urates (uric acid salts)
635. A patient with diabetes mellitus presents with thirst, polyuria, and dry skin and mucosa. These signs are caused by the elevated levels of the following substance in the patient's blood:
a. Phenylalanine
b. Cholesterol
c. Adrenaline
d. Urates (uric acid salts)
*e. Glucose
636. A patient with diabetes mellitus presents with thirst, polyuria, and dry skin and mucosa. These signs are caused by the elevated levels of the following substance in the patient's blood:
a. Urates (uric acid salts)
b. Cholesterol
*c. Glucose
d. Adrenaline
e. Phenylalanine
637. A patient with epilepsy was prescribed sodium valproate. What is the mechanism of action of this drug?
a. Stimulation of alpha-adrenergic receptors
*b. Increasing GABA levels in the brain
c. Stimulation of opioid receptors
d. Stimulation of beta-adrenergic receptors
e. Stimulation of butyrylcholinesterase activity
638. A patient with epilepsy was prescribed sodium valproate. What is the mechanism of action of this drug?
a. Stimulation of beta-adrenergic receptors
b. Stimulation of butyrylcholinesterase activity
*c. Increasing GABA levels in the brain
d. Stimulation of opioid receptors
e. Stimulation of alpha-adrenergic receptors
639. A patient with epilepsy was prescribed sodium valproate. What is the mechanism of action of this drug?
a. Stimulation of butyrylcholinesterase activity
b. Stimulation of opioid receptors
c. Stimulation of alpha-adrenergic receptors
d. Stimulation of beta-adrenergic receptors
*e. Increasing GABA levels in the brain
640. A patient with essential hypertension has been prescribed a drug with an antianginal, hypotensive, and antiarrhythmic effect. Name this drug.
*a. Metoprolol
b. Clonidine
c. Fenoterol
d. Epinephrine
e. Dopamine hydrochloride
641. A patient with essential hypertension has been prescribed a drug with an antianginal, hypotensive, and antiarrhythmic effect. Name this drug.
a. Epinephrine
b. Clonidine
*c. Metoprolol
d. Fenoterol
e. Dopamine hydrochloride
642. A patient with essential hypertension has been prescribed a drug with an antianginal, hypotensive, and antiarrhythmic effect. Name this drug.
a. Epinephrine
b. Dopamine hydrochloride
*c. Metoprolol
d. Clonidine
e. Fenoterol
643. A patient with essential hypertension has elevated plasma renin levels. What pharmacological group of medicines is preferable in the treatment of this patient?
*a. ACE inhibitors
b. Diuretics
c. Alpha-blockers
d. Calcium ion antagonists
e. Sympatholytics
644. A patient with essential hypertension has elevated plasma renin levels. What pharmacological group of medicines is preferable in the treatment of this patient?
a. Alpha-blockers
b. Calcium ion antagonists
c. Sympatholytics
d. Diuretics
*e. ACE inhibitors
645. A patient with essential hypertension has elevated plasma renin levels. What pharmacological group of medicines is preferable in the treatment of this patient?
a. Diuretics
b. Alpha-blockers
c. Sympatholytics
d. Calcium ion antagonists
*e. ACE inhibitors
646. A patient with essential hypertension is prescribed captopril. What is the mechanism of action of this drug?
a. Angiotensin II receptor block
*b. Inhibition of angiotensin-converting  enzyme activity
c. Slow calcium channel block
d. alpha-adrenoceptor block
e. beta-adrenoceptor block
647. A patient with essential hypertension is prescribed captopril. What is the mechanism of action of this drug?
a. Slow calcium channel block
b. Angiotensin II receptor block
*c. Inhibition of angiotensin-converting  enzyme activity
d. beta-adrenoceptor block
e. alpha-adrenoceptor block
648. A patient with essential hypertension is prescribed captopril. What is the mechanism of action of this drug?
a. Slow calcium channel block
b. beta-adrenoceptor block
c. alpha-adrenoceptor block
d. Angiotensin II receptor block
*e. Inhibition of angiotensin-converting  enzyme activity
649. A patient with essential hypertension was prescribed a diuretic as a part of complex therapy. This diuretic caused hypokalemia in the patient. Name this diuretic:
*a. Hydrochlorothiazide
b. Triamterene
c. Amiloride
d. Spironolactone
e. Allopurinol
650. A patient with essential hypertension was prescribed a diuretic as a part of complex therapy. This diuretic caused hypokalemia in the patient. Name this diuretic:
a. Allopurinol
*b. Hydrochlorothiazide
c. Spironolactone
d. Amiloride
e. Triamterene
651. A patient with essential hypertension was prescribed a diuretic as a part of complex therapy. This diuretic caused hypokalemia in the patient. Name this diuretic:
a. Allopurinol
b. Triamterene
c. Amiloride
*d. Hydrochlorothiazide
e. Spironolactone
652. A patient with food poisoning, accompanied by diarrhea and multiple episodes of vomiting, developed dehydration. What type of total blood volume disorder can be observed in this case?
a. Normocythemic hypovolemia
*b. Polycythemic hypovolemia
c. Oligocythemic hypovolemia
d. Polycythemic hypervolemia
e. Oligocytemic hypervolemia
653. A patient with food poisoning, accompanied by diarrhea and multiple episodes of vomiting, developed dehydration. What type of total blood volume disorder can be observed in this case?
a. Normocythemic hypovolemia
b. Oligocytemic hypervolemia
*c. Polycythemic hypovolemia
d. Polycythemic hypervolemia
e. Oligocythemic hypovolemia
654. A patient with food poisoning, accompanied by diarrhea and multiple episodes of vomiting, developed dehydration. What type of total blood volume disorder can be observed in this case?
a. Oligocythemic hypovolemia
b. Polycythemic hypervolemia
c. Oligocytemic hypervolemia
d. Normocythemic hypovolemia
*e. Polycythemic hypovolemia
655. A patient with frequent recurrent chronic bronchitis is prescribed a sulfanilamide drug. This drug is an analog of the following compound:
a. Citric acid
*b. P-aminobenzoic acid
c. Formic acid
d. Lactic acid
e. Uric acid
656. A patient with frequent recurrent chronic bronchitis is prescribed a sulfanilamide drug. This drug is an analog of the following compound:
a. Citric acid
b. Uric acid
c. Lactic acid
*d. P-aminobenzoic acid
e. Formic acid
657. A patient with frequent recurrent chronic bronchitis is prescribed a sulfanilamide drug. This drug is an analog of the following compound:
a. Lactic acid
b. Uric acid
c. Formic acid
*d. P-aminobenzoic acid
e. Citric acid
658. A patient with gastric carcinoma has undergone several courses of radiation therapy. What system is the first to become functionally disturbed after the body was exposed to ionizing radiation?
a. Respiratory
*b. Blood
c. Urinary
d. Digestive
e. Nervous
659. A patient with gastric carcinoma has undergone several courses of radiation therapy. What system is the first to become functionally disturbed after the body was exposed to ionizing radiation?
a. Urinary
*b. Blood
c. Nervous
d. Digestive
e. Respiratory
660. A patient with gastric carcinoma has undergone several courses of radiation therapy. What system is the first to become functionally disturbed after the body was exposed to ionizing radiation?
a. Urinary
*b. Blood
c. Nervous
d. Respiratory
e. Digestive
661. A patient with gingivitis was prescribed oral cavity irrigation with 0.02% potassium permanganate solution. What group of antiseptics does this drug belong to?
*a. Oxidants
b. Nitrofurans
c. Dyes
d. Alcohols
e. Detergents
662. A patient with gingivitis was prescribed oral cavity irrigation with 0.02% potassium permanganate solution. What group of antiseptics does this drug belong to?
a. Nitrofurans
*b. Oxidants
c. Detergents
d. Dyes
e. Alcohols
663. A patient with gingivitis was prescribed oral cavity irrigation with 0.02% potassium permanganate solution. What group of antiseptics does this drug belong to?
a. Nitrofurans
b. Alcohols
c. Dyes
*d. Oxidants
e. Detergents
664. A patient with gout was prescribed allopurinol - a competitive inhibitor of xanthine oxidase. Xanthine oxidase is a terminal enzyme of catabolism of:
*a. Purine nucleotides
b. Higher fatty acids
c. Phospholipids
d. Glycoproteins
e. Heteropolysaccharides
665. A patient with gout was prescribed allopurinol - a competitive inhibitor of xanthine oxidase. Xanthine oxidase is a terminal enzyme of catabolism of:
a. Heteropolysaccharides
b. Glycoproteins
*c. Purine nucleotides
d. Phospholipids
e. Higher fatty acids
666. A patient with gout was prescribed allopurinol - a competitive inhibitor of xanthine oxidase. Xanthine oxidase is a terminal enzyme of catabolism of:
a. Higher fatty acids
b. Glycoproteins
c. Heteropolysaccharides
d. Phospholipids
*e. Purine nucleotides
667. A patient with heart failure has developed acute edematous syndrome. What drug should be prescribed to make the edemas recede?
a. Nitroglycerine
*b. Furosemide
c. Nifedipine
d. Panangin (Potassium aspartate and magnesium aspartate)
e. Propranolol
668. A patient with heart failure has developed acute edematous syndrome. What drug should be prescribed to make the edemas recede?
a. Nitroglycerine
*b. Furosemide
c. Nifedipine
d. Propranolol
e. Panangin (Potassium aspartate and magnesium aspartate)
669. A patient with heart failure has developed acute edematous syndrome. What drug should be prescribed to make the edemas recede?
a. Nitroglycerine
b. Propranolol
*c. Furosemide
d. Panangin (Potassium aspartate and magnesium aspartate)
e. Nifedipine
670. A patient with high fever and pain in throat when swallowing is diagnosed with tonsillitis. Which of the listed symptoms is a local feature of acute inflammation?
a. Increased ESR
b. Fever
*c. Reddening
d. Leukocytosis
e. Tachycardia
671. A patient with high fever and pain in throat when swallowing is diagnosed with tonsillitis. Which of the listed symptoms is a local feature of acute inflammation?
a. Leukocytosis
b. Increased ESR
*c. Reddening
d. Fever
e. Tachycardia
672. A patient with high fever and pain in throat when swallowing is diagnosed with tonsillitis. Which of the listed symptoms is a local feature of acute inflammation?
a. Tachycardia
*b. Reddening
c. Fever
d. Leukocytosis
e. Increased ESR
673. A patient with high risk of hemorrhages is recommended to take vicasol (menadione) by his physician. This drug is the structural analog of:
*a. Vitamin K
b. Vitamin B_5
c. Vitamin A
d. Vitamin B_6
e. Vitamin B_12
674. A patient with high risk of hemorrhages is recommended to take vicasol (menadione) by his physician. This drug is the structural analog of:
a. Vitamin B_5
b. Vitamin A
*c. Vitamin K
d. Vitamin B_6
e. Vitamin B_12
675. A patient with high risk of hemorrhages is recommended to take vicasol (menadione) by his physician. This drug is the structural analog of:
a. Vitamin B_5
b. Vitamin B_12
c. Vitamin B_6
*d. Vitamin K
e. Vitamin A
676. A patient with hyperproduction of thyroid hormones has been prescribed Merkazolilum. This drug inhibits the following enzyme of iodothyronine synthesis:
a. Aromatase
b. Reductase
*c. Iodide peroxidase
d. Aminotransferase
e. Decarboxylase
677. A patient with hyperproduction of thyroid hormones has been prescribed Merkazolilum. This drug inhibits the following enzyme of iodothyronine synthesis:
a. Reductase
b. Decarboxylase
*c. Iodide peroxidase
d. Aminotransferase
e. Aromatase
678. A patient with hyperproduction of thyroid hormones has been prescribed Merkazolilum. This drug inhibits the following enzyme of iodothyronine synthesis:
a. Reductase
b. Decarboxylase
*c. Iodide peroxidase
d. Aromatase
e. Aminotransferase
679. A patient with hypertension has been prescribed a drug that blocks angiotensin receptors. Specify this drug:
a. Captopril
b. Apressin
c. Nifedipine
d. Prazosin
*e. Losartan
680. A patient with hypertension has been prescribed a drug that blocks angiotensin receptors. Specify this drug:
a. Prazosin
b. Captopril
c. Nifedipine
*d. Losartan
e. Apressin
681. A patient with hypertension has been prescribed a drug that blocks angiotensin receptors. Specify this drug:
a. Prazosin
b. Nifedipine
c. Apressin
*d. Losartan
e. Captopril
682. A patient with mushroom poisoning has developed the following symptoms: yellow coloring of skin and sclera, dark-coloured urine. Hemolytic jaundice was diagnosed. What pigment causes such colouring of the patient's urine?
*a. Stercobilin
b. Biliverdin
c. Verdohemoglobin
d. Conjugated bilirubin
e. Unconjugated bilirubin
683. A patient with mushroom poisoning has developed the following symptoms: yellow coloring of skin and sclera, dark-coloured urine. Hemolytic jaundice was diagnosed. What pigment causes such colouring of the patient's urine?
a. Biliverdin
b. Verdohemoglobin
c. Conjugated bilirubin
*d. Stercobilin
e. Unconjugated bilirubin
684. A patient with mushroom poisoning has developed the following symptoms: yellow coloring of skin and sclera, dark-coloured urine. Hemolytic jaundice was diagnosed. What pigment causes such colouring of the patient's urine?
a. Verdohemoglobin
*b. Stercobilin
c. Biliverdin
d. Unconjugated bilirubin
e. Conjugated bilirubin
685. A patient with myxedema was recommended substitution therapy. What hormones are used for this purpose?
a. Androgens
b. Estrogens
c. Mineralocorticoids
*d. Thyroid hormones
e. Glucocorticoids
686. A patient with myxedema was recommended substitution therapy. What hormones are used for this purpose?
a. Androgens
b. Glucocorticoids
c. Mineralocorticoids
d. Estrogens
*e. Thyroid hormones
687. A patient with myxedema was recommended substitution therapy. What hormones are used for this purpose?
a. Mineralocorticoids
b. Estrogens
*c. Thyroid hormones
d. Glucocorticoids
e. Androgens
688. A patient with neuritis takes diazepam. To relieve joint pain, he was prescribed an analgesic in a dose lower than the average therapeutic dose. What phenomenon did the doctor take into account when reducing the dose of the analgesic?
a. Summation
b. Drug addiction
c. Tolerance
d. Material cumulation
*e. Potentiation
689. A patient with neuritis takes diazepam. To relieve joint pain, he was prescribed an analgesic in a dose lower than the average therapeutic dose. What phenomenon did the doctor take into account when reducing the dose of the analgesic?
a. Tolerance
b. Drug addiction
c. Summation
d. Material cumulation
*e. Potentiation
690. A patient with neuritis takes diazepam. To relieve joint pain, he was prescribed an analgesic in a dose lower than the average therapeutic dose. What phenomenon did the doctor take into account when reducing the dose of the analgesic?
a. Tolerance
b. Summation
c. Material cumulation
*d. Potentiation
e. Drug addiction
691. A patient with neurosis suffers from fear and emotional tension. To relieve these symptoms a doctor prescribed the following drug:
*a. Diazepam
b. Nootropil (Pyracetam)
c. Sydnocarb (Mesocarb)
d. Caffeine
e. Lithium carbonate
692. A patient with neurosis suffers from fear and emotional tension. To relieve these symptoms a doctor prescribed the following drug:
a. Lithium carbonate
*b. Diazepam
c. Sydnocarb (Mesocarb)
d. Nootropil (Pyracetam)
e. Caffeine
693. A patient with neurosis suffers from fear and emotional tension. To relieve these symptoms a doctor prescribed the following drug:
a. Sydnocarb (Mesocarb)
b. Caffeine
*c. Diazepam
d. Nootropil (Pyracetam)
e. Lithium carbonate
694. A patient with peptic ulcer disease of the duodenum was taking a histamine H_2 receptor blocker. Which one of the listed drugs belongs to this group?
*a. Famotidine
b. Omeprazole
c. Allochol
d. Mebeverine
e. Pirenzepine
695. A patient with peptic ulcer disease of the duodenum was taking a histamine H_2 receptor blocker. Which one of the listed drugs belongs to this group?
a. Omeprazole
*b. Famotidine
c. Mebeverine
d. Allochol
e. Pirenzepine
696. A patient with peptic ulcer disease of the duodenum was taking a histamine H_2 receptor blocker. Which one of the listed drugs belongs to this group?
a. Pirenzepine
b. Mebeverine
c. Allochol
d. Omeprazole
*e. Famotidine
697. A patient with peptic ulcer of duodenum was taking a histamine H_2-receptor antagonist. What drug of those given below belongs to this group?
a. Gastrozepin (Pirenzepine)
b. Almagel (algeldrate + magnesium hydroxide)
*c. Famotidine
d. Omeprazole
e. Allochol
698. A patient with peptic ulcer of duodenum was taking a histamine H_2-receptor antagonist. What drug of those given below belongs to this group?
a. Gastrozepin (Pirenzepine)
b. Omeprazole
c. Allochol
*d. Famotidine
e. Almagel (algeldrate + magnesium hydroxide)
699. A patient with peptic ulcer of duodenum was taking a histamine H_2-receptor antagonist. What drug of those given below belongs to this group?
a. Omeprazole
*b. Famotidine
c. Almagel (algeldrate + magnesium hydroxide)
d. Allochol
e. Gastrozepin (Pirenzepine)
700. A patient with primary hypertension is prescribed captopril. What is this drug's mechanism of action?
a. Angiotensin II receptors block
b. Block of slow calcium channels
*c. Inhibition of angiotensin converting enzyme activity
d. beta-adrenergic block
e. alpha-adrenergic block
701. A patient with primary hypertension is prescribed captopril. What is this drug's mechanism of action?
a. Angiotensin II receptors block
b. Block of slow calcium channels
c. alpha-adrenergic block
d. beta-adrenergic block
*e. Inhibition of angiotensin converting enzyme activity
702. A patient with primary hypertension is prescribed captopril. What is this drug's mechanism of action?
a. beta-adrenergic block
b. Block of slow calcium channels
c. Angiotensin II receptors block
d. alpha-adrenergic block
*e. Inhibition of angiotensin converting enzyme activity
703. A patient with signs of cardiac glycosides intoxication was prescribed Unithiol. What is the mechanism of drug action in this case?
*a. Reactivation of membrane K^+, Na^+ -adenosine triphosphatase
b. Increased Na^+ content in the myocardium
c. Increased inflow of K^+ to cardiomyocytes
d. Binding of ionized Ca^2+
e. Induction of cardiac glycoside metabolism
704. A patient with signs of cardiac glycosides intoxication was prescribed Unithiol. What is the mechanism of drug action in this case?
*a. Reactivation of membrane K^+, Na^+ -adenosine triphosphatase
b. Induction of cardiac glycoside metabolism
c. Increased inflow of K^+ to cardiomyocytes
d. Binding of ionized Ca^2+
e. Increased Na^+ content in the myocardium
705. A patient with signs of cardiac glycosides intoxication was prescribed Unithiol. What is the mechanism of drug action in this case?
a. Increased Na^+ content in the myocardium
b. Induction of cardiac glycoside metabolism
c. Binding of ionized Ca^2+
d. Increased inflow of K^+ to cardiomyocytes
*e. Reactivation of membrane K^+, Na^+ -adenosine triphosphatase
706. A patient with symptoms of cardiac glycosides intoxication is prescribed Unithiol (Dimercaprol). What is the drug's mechansm of action?
a. Binding ionized Ca^2+
b. Increase of Na^+ content in myocardium
c. Induction of cardiac glycosides metabolism
d. Increase of K^+ penetration of myocardiocytes
*e. Reactivation of membrane K^+, Na^+-adenosinetriphosphatase
707. A patient with symptoms of cardiac glycosides intoxication is prescribed Unithiol (Dimercaprol). What is the drug's mechansm of action?
a. Increase of K^+ penetration of myocardiocytes
b. Increase of Na^+ content in myocardium
c. Binding ionized Ca^2+
d. Induction of cardiac glycosides metabolism
*e. Reactivation of membrane K^+, Na^+-adenosinetriphosphatase
708. A patient with symptoms of cardiac glycosides intoxication is prescribed Unithiol (Dimercaprol). What is the drug's mechansm of action?
a. Induction of cardiac glycosides metabolism
b. Binding ionized Ca^2+
*c. Reactivation of membrane K^+, Na^+-adenosinetriphosphatase
d. Increase of K^+ penetration of myocardiocytes
e. Increase of Na^+ content in myocardium
709. A patient with tuberculosis developed impaired hearing after a long-term treatment with an antibiotic. What drug had an ototoxic effect in this case?
a. Ampicillin
*b. Streptomycin
c. Abaktal (Pefloxacin)
d. Benzylpenicillin
e. Ceftriaxone
710. A patient with tuberculosis developed impaired hearing after a long-term treatment with an antibiotic. What drug had an ototoxic effect in this case?
a. Ampicillin
b. Benzylpenicillin
c. Ceftriaxone
*d. Streptomycin
e. Abaktal (Pefloxacin)
711. A patient with tuberculosis developed impaired hearing after a long-term treatment with an antibiotic. What drug had an ototoxic effect in this case?
a. Ceftriaxone
b. Abaktal (Pefloxacin)
*c. Streptomycin
d. Benzylpenicillin
e. Ampicillin
712. A patient with tuberculosis has been prescribed some anti-tuberculosis preparations. Which of the following chemotherapeutic drugs has an effect on the tuberculosis pathogen?
*a. Ftivazide
b. Furacilinum
c. Sulfadimezinum
d. Phthalylsulfathiazole
e. Methisazonum
713. A patient with tuberculosis has been prescribed some anti-tuberculosis preparations. Which of the following chemotherapeutic drugs has an effect on the tuberculosis pathogen?
*a. Ftivazide
b. Sulfadimezinum
c. Furacilinum
d. Methisazonum
e. Phthalylsulfathiazole
714. A patient with tuberculosis has been prescribed some anti-tuberculosis preparations. Which of the following chemotherapeutic drugs has an effect on the tuberculosis pathogen?
*a. Ftivazide
b. Sulfadimezinum
c. Methisazonum
d. Furacilinum
e. Phthalylsulfathiazole
715. A patient with tuberculosis has developed impaired hearing after a long-term antibiotic treatment. What drug has caused such an ototoxic effect in this case?
*a. Streptomycin
b. Benzylpenicillin
c. Ceftriaxone
d. Pefloxacin
e. Ampicillin
716. A patient with tuberculosis has developed impaired hearing after a long-term antibiotic treatment. What drug has caused such an ototoxic effect in this case?
*a. Streptomycin
b. Benzylpenicillin
c. Pefloxacin
d. Ampicillin
e. Ceftriaxone
717. A patient with tuberculosis has developed impaired hearing after a long-term antibiotic treatment. What drug has caused such an ototoxic effect in this case?
a. Ampicillin
b. Pefloxacin
c. Benzylpenicillin
d. Ceftriaxone
*e. Streptomycin
718. A patient with type II diabetes mellitus was prescribed a synthetic drug that is a sulfonylurea derivative. Name this drug:
a. Furosemide
b. Prednisolone
c. Anaprilin (Propranolol)
d. Insulin
*e. Glibenclamide
719. A patient with type II diabetes mellitus was prescribed a synthetic drug that is a sulfonylurea derivative. Name this drug:
a. Prednisolone
b. Anaprilin (Propranolol)
c. Insulin
*d. Glibenclamide
e. Furosemide
720. A patient with type II diabetes mellitus was prescribed a synthetic drug that is a sulfonylurea derivative. Name this drug:
a. Prednisolone
b. Insulin
c. Anaprilin (Propranolol)
d. Furosemide
*e. Glibenclamide
721. A patient, who lives in the area with specific geochemical conditions, was diagnosed with endemic goiter. What microelement deficiency results in development of this pathology?
a. Cl
b. Na
*c. I
d. F
e. Br
722. A patient, who lives in the area with specific geochemical conditions, was diagnosed with endemic goiter. What microelement deficiency results in development of this pathology?
a. F
*b. I
c. Cl
d. Br
e. Na
723. A patient, who lives in the area with specific geochemical conditions, was diagnosed with endemic goiter. What microelement deficiency results in development of this pathology?
a. Na
b. Br
c. Cl
d. F
*e. I
724. A patient, who was prescribed famotidine to treat peptic ulcer disease, came to the pharmacy. What is this drug's mechanism of action?
*a. H2-histamine receptor blockade
b. Muscarinic receptor blockade
c. H1-histamine receptor blockade
d. Ganglionic receptor blockade
e. Inhibition of hydrogen potassium ATPase
725. A patient, who was prescribed famotidine to treat peptic ulcer disease, came to the pharmacy. What is this drug's mechanism of action?
a. Inhibition of hydrogen potassium ATPase
b. H1-histamine receptor blockade
c. Muscarinic receptor blockade
d. Ganglionic receptor blockade
*e. H2-histamine receptor blockade
726. A patient, who was prescribed famotidine to treat peptic ulcer disease, came to the pharmacy. What is this drug's mechanism of action?
a. Inhibition of hydrogen potassium ATPase
b. Muscarinic receptor blockade
c. H1-histamine receptor blockade
d. Ganglionic receptor blockade
*e. H2-histamine receptor blockade
727. A perennial herbaceous plant has the following characteristic features: calyx with an epicalyx, double perianth, fused stamens with purple anthers, its fruit is a disc-like schizocarp. Name this plant.
*a. Althaea officinalis
b. Melissa officinalis
c. Hyoscyamus niger
d. Amygdalus communis
e. Polygonum persicaria
728. A perennial herbaceous plant has the following characteristic features: calyx with an epicalyx, double perianth, fused stamens with purple anthers, its fruit is a disc-like schizocarp. Name this plant.
*a. Althaea officinalis
b. Melissa officinalis
c. Polygonum persicaria
d. Amygdalus communis
e. Hyoscyamus niger
729. A perennial herbaceous plant has the following characteristic features: calyx with an epicalyx, double perianth, fused stamens with purple anthers, its fruit is a disc-like schizocarp. Name this plant.
a. Polygonum persicaria
*b. Althaea officinalis
c. Melissa officinalis
d. Amygdalus communis
e. Hyoscyamus niger
730. A person diagnosed with ischemic heart disease presents with stable angina pectoris, atherosclerosis, and elevated plasma lipids. What class of lipids plays the main role in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis?
a. Fatty acid-albumin complexes
*b. Low density lipoproteins
c. High density lipoproteins
d. Triglycerides
e. Chylomicrons
731. A person diagnosed with ischemic heart disease presents with stable angina pectoris, atherosclerosis, and elevated plasma lipids. What class of lipids plays the main role in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis?
a. Fatty acid-albumin complexes
*b. Low density lipoproteins
c. Triglycerides
d. Chylomicrons
e. High density lipoproteins
732. A person diagnosed with ischemic heart disease presents with stable angina pectoris, atherosclerosis, and elevated plasma lipids. What class of lipids plays the main role in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis?
a. High density lipoproteins
b. Fatty acid-albumin complexes
*c. Low density lipoproteins
d. Triglycerides
e. Chylomicrons
733. A person has been stung by a bee. The stung area developed redness and edema. What is the main mechanism of edema development in this case?
a. Decreased osmotic blood pressure
*b. Increased permeability of the capillaries
c. Increased hydrostatic blood pressure
d. Disturbed lymphatic efflux
e. Decreased oncotic blood pressure
734. A person has been stung by a bee. The stung area developed redness and edema. What is the main mechanism of edema development in this case?
a. Decreased osmotic blood pressure
b. Disturbed lymphatic efflux
c. Increased hydrostatic blood pressure
d. Decreased oncotic blood pressure
*e. Increased permeability of the capillaries
735. A person has been stung by a bee. The stung area developed redness and edema. What is the main mechanism of edema development in this case?
a. Increased hydrostatic blood pressure
b. Disturbed lymphatic efflux
c. Decreased oncotic blood pressure
d. Decreased osmotic blood pressure
*e. Increased permeability of the capillaries
736. A person has extremely pale skin, white hair, and blue semi-transparent irises that under bright light assume a pink hue. These signs are caused by insufficient synthesis of the following in the patient's body:
a. Cholesterol
b. Glucose
*c. Melanin
d. Serine
e. Phenylalanine
737. A person has extremely pale skin, white hair, and blue semi-transparent irises that under bright light assume a pink hue. These signs are caused by insufficient synthesis of the following in the patient's body:
a. Glucose
b. Phenylalanine
c. Serine
*d. Melanin
e. Cholesterol
738. A person has extremely pale skin, white hair, and blue semi-transparent irises that under bright light assume a pink hue. These signs are caused by insufficient synthesis of the following in the patient's body:
a. Glucose
b. Serine
*c. Melanin
d. Phenylalanine
e. Cholesterol
739. A person suffers from a chronic inflammatory process. In the focus of the inflammation, a certain biochemical process maintains the concentration of NADPH that is necessary for the phagocytosis mechanism to occur. What process is it?
a. Cori cycle
b. Ornithine cycle
c. Uric acid synthesis
*d. Pentose phosphate pathway
e. Glycolysis
740. A person suffers from a chronic inflammatory process. In the focus of the inflammation, a certain biochemical process maintains the concentration of NADPH that is necessary for the phagocytosis mechanism to occur. What process is it?
a. Ornithine cycle
*b. Pentose phosphate pathway
c. Uric acid synthesis
d. Cori cycle
e. Glycolysis
741. A person suffers from a chronic inflammatory process. In the focus of the inflammation, a certain biochemical process maintains the concentration of NADPH that is necessary for the phagocytosis mechanism to occur. What process is it?
a. Ornithine cycle
b. Glycolysis
c. Cori cycle
*d. Pentose phosphate pathway
e. Uric acid synthesis
742. A person was hospitalized into the infectious department with the body temperature of 39^oC, headache, and chills. Spiral-shaped microorganisms stained violet according to the Romanowsky-Giemsa technique were detected in the thick blood smear. What microorganisms were detected in the patient?
*a. Borrelia
b. Leptospira
c. Treponema
d. Clostridia
e. Actinomycetes
743. A person was hospitalized into the infectious department with the body temperature of 39^oC, headache, and chills. Spiral-shaped microorganisms stained violet according to the Romanowsky-Giemsa technique were detected in the thick blood smear. What microorganisms were detected in the patient?
a. Actinomycetes
b. Clostridia
*c. Borrelia
d. Treponema
e. Leptospira
744. A person was hospitalized into the infectious department with the body temperature of 39^oC, headache, and chills. Spiral-shaped microorganisms stained violet according to the Romanowsky-Giemsa technique were detected in the thick blood smear. What microorganisms were detected in the patient?
a. Leptospira
b. Treponema
*c. Borrelia
d. Clostridia
e. Actinomycetes
745. A person with a past history of acute myocardial infarction was recommended to take an antiaggregant that blocks platelet cyclooxygenase. What medicine can be classified as an antiaggregant?
a. Abciximab
b. Dipyridamole
*c. Acetylsalicylic acid
d. Clopidogrel
e. Ticlopidine
746. A person with a past history of acute myocardial infarction was recommended to take an antiaggregant that blocks platelet cyclooxygenase. What medicine can be classified as an antiaggregant?
a. Abciximab
b. Ticlopidine
c. Dipyridamole
*d. Acetylsalicylic acid
e. Clopidogrel
747. A person with a past history of acute myocardial infarction was recommended to take an antiaggregant that blocks platelet cyclooxygenase. What medicine can be classified as an antiaggregant?
a. Dipyridamole
*b. Acetylsalicylic acid
c. Clopidogrel
d. Ticlopidine
e. Abciximab
748. A person with carbon monoxide poisoning (CO) presents with disturbed consciousness and high levels of carboxyhemoglobin in blood. What type of hypoxia does this patient have?
a. Exogenic
b. Respiratory
c. Tissue
d. Circulatory
*e. Hemic
749. A person with carbon monoxide poisoning (CO) presents with disturbed consciousness and high levels of carboxyhemoglobin in blood. What type of hypoxia does this patient have?
a. Respiratory
b. Tissue
c. Exogenic
*d. Hemic
e. Circulatory
750. A person with carbon monoxide poisoning (CO) presents with disturbed consciousness and high levels of carboxyhemoglobin in blood. What type of hypoxia does this patient have?
a. Tissue
b. Circulatory
*c. Hemic
d. Respiratory
e. Exogenic
751. A person with essential hypertension was prescribed lisinopril. What is the typical side effect of this medicine?
*a. Dry cough
b. Constipation
c. Increased appetite
d. Vomiting
e. Insomnia
752. A person with essential hypertension was prescribed lisinopril. What is the typical side effect of this medicine?
a. Constipation
b. Vomiting
*c. Dry cough
d. Increased appetite
e. Insomnia
753. A person with essential hypertension was prescribed lisinopril. What is the typical side effect of this medicine?
a. Insomnia
b. Constipation
c. Increased appetite
d. Vomiting
*e. Dry cough
754. A pharmaceutical factory has received a batch of a herbal raw material that, based on the external signs, was affected by a viral disease. What modern method of diagnostics should be used for the specific detection of viral nucleic acids in plants?
a. Hemagglutination inhibition reaction
b. Indirect hemagglutination reaction
c. Hemagglutination reaction
d. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
*e. Molecular hybridization
755. A pharmaceutical factory has received a batch of a herbal raw material that, based on the external signs, was affected by a viral disease. What modern method of diagnostics should be used for the specific detection of viral nucleic acids in plants?
a. Hemagglutination reaction
*b. Molecular hybridization
c. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
d. Indirect hemagglutination reaction
e. Hemagglutination inhibition reaction
756. A pharmaceutical factory has received a batch of a herbal raw material that, based on the external signs, was affected by a viral disease. What modern method of diagnostics should be used for the specific detection of viral nucleic acids in plants?
a. Indirect hemagglutination reaction
b. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
c. Hemagglutination reaction
*d. Molecular hybridization
e. Hemagglutination inhibition reaction
757. A pharmaceutical manufacture produces a drug, that is an animal antibiotic. Point out this drug among those listed below:
a. Chloramphenicol
b. Novobiocin
c. Phaseolin
d. Gramicidin
*e. Lysozyme
758. A pharmaceutical manufacture produces a drug, that is an animal antibiotic. Point out this drug among those listed below:
a. Novobiocin
b. Chloramphenicol
c. Gramicidin
*d. Lysozyme
e. Phaseolin
759. A pharmaceutical manufacture produces a drug, that is an animal antibiotic. Point out this drug among those listed below:
a. Phaseolin
b. Novobiocin
c. Gramicidin
*d. Lysozyme
e. Chloramphenicol
760. A pharmacy has decided to use a biological method for quality control of instrument sterilization in an autoclave. What microorganisms optimally should be used for this purpose?
*a. Bacillus subtilis
b. Streptococcus pyogenes
c. Borrelia recurrentis
d. Salmonella typhi
e. Yersinia pestis
761. A pharmacy has decided to use a biological method for quality control of instrument sterilization in an autoclave. What microorganisms optimally should be used for this purpose?
a. Borrelia recurrentis
b. Streptococcus pyogenes
c. Salmonella typhi
*d. Bacillus subtilis
e. Yersinia pestis
762. A pharmacy has decided to use a biological method for quality control of instrument sterilization in an autoclave. What microorganisms optimally should be used for this purpose?
a. Streptococcus pyogenes
*b. Bacillus subtilis
c. Salmonella typhi
d. Borrelia recurrentis
e. Yersinia pestis
763. A pharmacy has received a batch of drugs for treatment of upper respiratory tract infection. What drug is used to treat influenza?
*a. Rimantadine
b. Idoxuridine
c. Levamisole
d. Doxycycline
e. Methisazone
764. A pharmacy has received a batch of drugs for treatment of upper respiratory tract infection. What drug is used to treat influenza?
a. Doxycycline
*b. Rimantadine
c. Methisazone
d. Levamisole
e. Idoxuridine
765. A pharmacy has received a batch of drugs for treatment of upper respiratory tract infection. What drug is used to treat influenza?
a. Methisazone
b. Doxycycline
c. Idoxuridine
d. Levamisole
*e. Rimantadine
766. A pharmacy needs to sterilize a liquid dosage form by means of a mechanical sterilization method. What device should be used for this purpose?
a. Autoclave
b. Pasteur oven
c. Steam sterilizer
*d. Seitz filter
e. Koch apparatus
767. A pharmacy needs to sterilize a liquid dosage form by means of a mechanical sterilization method. What device should be used for this purpose?
a. Pasteur oven
b. Autoclave
*c. Seitz filter
d. Steam sterilizer
e. Koch apparatus
768. A pharmacy needs to sterilize a liquid dosage form by means of a mechanical sterilization method. What device should be used for this purpose?
a. Pasteur oven
b. Steam sterilizer
c. Autoclave
*d. Seitz filter
e. Koch apparatus
769. A pharmacy network is supplied with significant amount of sterile medical products (bandages, rubber gloves, catheters, etc.). What ensures their sterility during manufacturing?
a. Beta irradiation
b. Gamma irradiation
c. Ultraviolet irradiation
d. Infrared irradiation
*e. Alpha irradiation
770. A pharmacy network is supplied with significant amount of sterile medical products (bandages, rubber gloves, catheters, etc.). What ensures their sterility during manufacturing?
a. Beta irradiation
b. Infrared irradiation
*c. Alpha irradiation
d. Gamma irradiation
e. Ultraviolet irradiation
771. A pharmacy network is supplied with significant amount of sterile medical products (bandages, rubber gloves, catheters, etc.). What ensures their sterility during manufacturing?
a. Ultraviolet irradiation
b. Gamma irradiation
*c. Alpha irradiation
d. Infrared irradiation
e. Beta irradiation
772. A pharmacy produces a batch of vials with physiological saline for injections. How should they be sterilized?
a. In a steam-jacketed autoclave chamber
b. Ultraviolet irradiation
*c. Under pressure in an autoclave
d. In a dry heat sterilizer
e. X-ray irradiation
773. A pharmacy produces a batch of vials with physiological saline for injections. How should they be sterilized?
a. Ultraviolet irradiation
b. In a dry heat sterilizer
c. X-ray irradiation
*d. Under pressure in an autoclave
e. In a steam-jacketed autoclave chamber
774. A pharmacy produces a batch of vials with physiological saline for injections. How should they be sterilized?
a. X-ray irradiation
b. In a dry heat sterilizer
c. Ultraviolet irradiation
d. In a steam-jacketed autoclave chamber
*e. Under pressure in an autoclave
775. A pharmacy produces eye drops and dispenses them into sterile vials. What method should be used to sterilize the vials?
*a. Dry heat box
b. Boiling
c. Autoclaving
d. Disinfectant solutions
e. Ultraviolet irradiation
776. A pharmacy produces eye drops and dispenses them into sterile vials. What method should be used to sterilize the vials?
a. Autoclaving
*b. Dry heat box
c. Boiling
d. Ultraviolet irradiation
e. Disinfectant solutions
777. A pharmacy produces eye drops and dispenses them into sterile vials. What method should be used to sterilize the vials?
a. Disinfectant solutions
b. Ultraviolet irradiation
c. Autoclaving
d. Boiling
*e. Dry heat box
778. A plant has floating leaves with thick leathery cuticle, stratified columnar parenchyma, and spongy parenchyma with large intercellular spaces. Only the upper epidermis has stomata in it. This plant is a:
a. Heliophyte
b. Xerophyte
*c. Hydrophyte
d. Mesophyte
e. Sciophyte
779. A plant has floating leaves with thick leathery cuticle, stratified columnar parenchyma, and spongy parenchyma with large intercellular spaces. Only the upper epidermis has stomata in it. This plant is a:
a. Heliophyte
b. Xerophyte
c. Sciophyte
*d. Hydrophyte
e. Mesophyte
780. A plant has floating leaves with thick leathery cuticle, stratified columnar parenchyma, and spongy parenchyma with large intercellular spaces. Only the upper epidermis has stomata in it. This plant is a:
a. Mesophyte
b. Xerophyte
c. Sciophyte
*d. Hydrophyte
e. Heliophyte
781. A plant has lacticifers with milky sap and single flowers with deciduous calyx lobes; the fruit is a capsule. Determine the family of this plant based on these diagnostic characters:
*a. Papaveraceae
b. Compositae
c. Apiaceae
d. Fabaceae
e. Rosaceae
782. A plant has lacticifers with milky sap and single flowers with deciduous calyx lobes; the fruit is a capsule. Determine the family of this plant based on these diagnostic characters:
a. Fabaceae
*b. Papaveraceae
c. Apiaceae
d. Rosaceae
e. Compositae
783. A plant has lacticifers with milky sap and single flowers with deciduous calyx lobes; the fruit is a capsule. Determine the family of this plant based on these diagnostic characters:
a. Rosaceae
b. Fabaceae
*c. Papaveraceae
d. Apiaceae
e. Compositae
784. A plant has roots with bacteriorhiza, complex leaves with stipules, flowers with a papilionaceous corolla, and a silique fruit. These features are characteristic of the following family:
a. Apiaceae
b. Solanaceae
c. Lamiaceae
*d. Fabaceae
e. Asteraceae
785. A plant has roots with bacteriorhiza, complex leaves with stipules, flowers with a papilionaceous corolla, and a silique fruit. These features are characteristic of the following family:
a. Lamiaceae
b. Solanaceae
c. Apiaceae
*d. Fabaceae
e. Asteraceae
786. A plant has roots with bacteriorhiza, complex leaves with stipules, flowers with a papilionaceous corolla, and a silique fruit. These features are characteristic of the following family:
a. Solanaceae
*b. Fabaceae
c. Apiaceae
d. Lamiaceae
e. Asteraceae
787. A poisonous weed of the Solanaceae family has branching downy stems. Its leaves are soft, dull, and dark green; on their lower surface they are light gray, with thicker and longer down along their veins and edges. The flowers are sessile, with a deciduous five-lobed funnelform corolla that is colored dirty yellow (rarely whitish) and has a network of purple-violet veins. The fruit is an urceolate capsule with an operculum. These features are characteristic of:
*a. Hyoscyamus niger
b. Atropa belladonna
c. Datura stramonium
d. Datura innoxia
e. Nicotiana tabacum
788. A poisonous weed of the Solanaceae family has branching downy stems. Its leaves are soft, dull, and dark green; on their lower surface they are light gray, with thicker and longer down along their veins and edges. The flowers are sessile, with a deciduous five-lobed funnelform corolla that is colored dirty yellow (rarely whitish) and has a network of purple-violet veins. The fruit is an urceolate capsule with an operculum. These features are characteristic of:
*a. Hyoscyamus niger
b. Atropa belladonna
c. Datura stramonium
d. Nicotiana tabacum
e. Datura innoxia
789. A poisonous weed of the Solanaceae family has branching downy stems. Its leaves are soft, dull, and dark green; on their lower surface they are light gray, with thicker and longer down along their veins and edges. The flowers are sessile, with a deciduous five-lobed funnelform corolla that is colored dirty yellow (rarely whitish) and has a network of purple-violet veins. The fruit is an urceolate capsule with an operculum. These features are characteristic of:
a. Atropa belladonna
b. Datura innoxia
c. Datura stramonium
d. Nicotiana tabacum
*e. Hyoscyamus niger
790. A potassium chromate solution was added into the solution being analyzed, which resulted in the formation of a yellow precipitate, soluble in acetic acid. What cations were present in the solution, as indicated by this qualitative reaction?
*a. Strontium cations
b. Ammonium cations
c. Magnesium cations
d. Sodium cations
e. Potassium cations
791. A potassium chromate solution was added into the solution being analyzed, which resulted in the formation of a yellow precipitate, soluble in acetic acid. What cations were present in the solution, as indicated by this qualitative reaction?
a. Ammonium cations
*b. Strontium cations
c. Potassium cations
d. Sodium cations
e. Magnesium cations
792. A potassium chromate solution was added into the solution being analyzed, which resulted in the formation of a yellow precipitate, soluble in acetic acid. What cations were present in the solution, as indicated by this qualitative reaction?
a. Sodium cations
*b. Strontium cations
c. Ammonium cations
d. Potassium cations
e. Magnesium cations
793. A pregnant woman develops leg edemas in the evening. In the morning, the edemas disappear. What pathogenetic factor contributes to the development of edema in this case?
*a. Increase of hydrostatic blood pressure
b. Hyperglycemia
c. Decrease of hydrostatic blood pressure
d. Decrease of oncotic blood pressure
e. Increase of oncotic blood pressure
794. A pregnant woman develops leg edemas in the evening. In the morning, the edemas disappear. What pathogenetic factor contributes to the development of edema in this case?
a. Decrease of oncotic blood pressure
b. Increase of oncotic blood pressure
*c. Increase of hydrostatic blood pressure
d. Decrease of hydrostatic blood pressure
e. Hyperglycemia
795. A pregnant woman develops leg edemas in the evening. In the morning, the edemas disappear. What pathogenetic factor contributes to the development of edema in this case?
a. Hyperglycemia
b. Decrease of oncotic blood pressure
*c. Increase of hydrostatic blood pressure
d. Increase of oncotic blood pressure
e. Decrease of hydrostatic blood pressure
796. A pregnant woman has received intravenously a uterotonic to stimulate uterine activity. This drug is a synthetic analog of a hormone of the posterior pituitary. Name this drug:
a. Folliculin (Estrone)
*b. Oxytocin
c. Anaprilin (Propranolol)
d. Dinoprost
e. Proserin
797. A pregnant woman has received intravenously a uterotonic to stimulate uterine activity. This drug is a synthetic analog of a hormone of the posterior pituitary. Name this drug:
a. Proserin
b. Anaprilin (Propranolol)
*c. Oxytocin
d. Folliculin (Estrone)
e. Dinoprost
798. A pregnant woman has received intravenously a uterotonic to stimulate uterine activity. This drug is a synthetic analog of a hormone of the posterior pituitary. Name this drug:
a. Proserin
b. Folliculin (Estrone)
c. Anaprilin (Propranolol)
d. Dinoprost
*e. Oxytocin
799. A pregnant woman suffers from pneumonia: the term of pregnancy is 20 weeks. What chemotherapeutical drug not dangerous to development of the fetus can be prescribed to the patient?
a. Levomycetin (Chloramphenicol)
b. Sulfalene
*c. Benzylpenicillin
d. Gentamicin
e. Ofloxacin
800. A pregnant woman suffers from pneumonia: the term of pregnancy is 20 weeks. What chemotherapeutical drug not dangerous to development of the fetus can be prescribed to the patient?
a. Ofloxacin
b. Gentamicin
c. Levomycetin (Chloramphenicol)
d. Sulfalene
*e. Benzylpenicillin
801. A pregnant woman suffers from pneumonia: the term of pregnancy is 20 weeks. What chemotherapeutical drug not dangerous to development of the fetus can be prescribed to the patient?
a. Sulfalene
b. Ofloxacin
c. Gentamicin
d. Levomycetin (Chloramphenicol)
*e. Benzylpenicillin
802. A pregnant woman was administered fenoterol to reduce the uterine tone for the correction of her labor activity. What is the mechanism of the uterolytic effect of this drug?
*a. Stimulation of beta_2-adrenoceptors of the uterus
b. Direct antispasmodic effect
c. Blocking beta_2-adrenoceptors of the uterus
d. Stimulation of alpha_1-adrenoceptors of the uterus
e. Stimulation of beta_2- and alpha_1-adrenoceptors of the uterus
803. A pregnant woman was administered fenoterol to reduce the uterine tone for the correction of her labor activity. What is the mechanism of the uterolytic effect of this drug?
a. Direct antispasmodic effect
b. Blocking beta_2-adrenoceptors of the uterus
c. Stimulation of alpha_1-adrenoceptors of the uterus
d. Stimulation of beta_2- and alpha_1-adrenoceptors of the uterus
*e. Stimulation of beta_2-adrenoceptors of the uterus
804. A pregnant woman was administered fenoterol to reduce the uterine tone for the correction of her labor activity. What is the mechanism of the uterolytic effect of this drug?
a. Stimulation of alpha_1-adrenoceptors of the uterus
b. Stimulation of beta_2- and alpha_1-adrenoceptors of the uterus
c. Direct antispasmodic effect
*d. Stimulation of beta_2-adrenoceptors of the uterus
e. Blocking beta_2-adrenoceptors of the uterus
805. A pure culture of movable vibrios was obtained from a patient diagnosed with cholera. What group of flagellates does this agent belong to?
*a. Monotrichous
b. Amphitrichous
c. Lophotrichous
d. -
e. Peritrichous
806. A pure culture of movable vibrios was obtained from a patient diagnosed with cholera. What group of flagellates does this agent belong to?
a. -
*b. Monotrichous
c. Amphitrichous
d. Lophotrichous
e. Peritrichous
807. A pure culture of movable vibrios was obtained from a patient diagnosed with cholera. What group of flagellates does this agent belong to?
a. Lophotrichous
b. Peritrichous
c. -
d. Amphitrichous
*e. Monotrichous
808. A quantity of medicine expressed in units of mass (milligram, gram), volume, or bioactivity (units of activity) is called:
a. Dosage form
*b. Dose
c. Therapeutic index
d. Effectiveness
e. Speed of action
809. A quantity of medicine expressed in units of mass (milligram, gram), volume, or bioactivity (units of activity) is called:
a. Dosage form
b. Effectiveness
*c. Dose
d. Speed of action
e. Therapeutic index
810. A quantity of medicine expressed in units of mass (milligram, gram), volume, or bioactivity (units of activity) is called:
a. Dosage form
b. Speed of action
*c. Dose
d. Effectiveness
e. Therapeutic index
811. A ready-made drug was inoculated on Sabouraud's agar and incubated under 22^oC for 5 days. This nutrient medium was used to determine the following:
a. Presence of E) coli
*b. Number of mold and yeast fungi
c. Total number of bacteria
d. Presence of S. aureus
e. Presence of Salmonella
812. A ready-made drug was inoculated on Sabouraud's agar and incubated under 22^oC for 5 days. This nutrient medium was used to determine the following:
a. Presence of E) coli
b. Presence of S. aureus
c. Total number of bacteria
*d. Number of mold and yeast fungi
e. Presence of Salmonella
813. A ready-made drug was inoculated on Sabouraud's agar and incubated under 22^oC for 5 days. This nutrient medium was used to determine the following:
a. Presence of S. aureus
b. Total number of bacteria
c. Presence of Salmonella
d. Presence of E) coli
*e. Number of mold and yeast fungi
814. A sailor, who had been at sea for 10 months, developed bleeding gums and mobility and loss of healthy teeth. After an examination he was diagnosed with scurvy. What vitamin is deficient in this case, causing this disease?
a. Vitamin E
b. Folic acid
*c. Vitamin C
d. Vitamin D
e. Nicotinic acid
815. A sailor, who had been at sea for 10 months, developed bleeding gums and mobility and loss of healthy teeth. After an examination he was diagnosed with scurvy. What vitamin is deficient in this case, causing this disease?
a. Vitamin E
b. Nicotinic acid
c. Folic acid
d. Vitamin D
*e. Vitamin C
816. A sailor, who had been at sea for 10 months, developed bleeding gums and mobility and loss of healthy teeth. After an examination he was diagnosed with scurvy. What vitamin is deficient in this case, causing this disease?
a. Vitamin E
b. Vitamin D
c. Folic acid
*d. Vitamin C
e. Nicotinic acid
817. A sample obtained from the wound of a patient with suspected gas anaerobic infection was inoculated on the Kitt-Tarozzi medium. Why must this medium be heated before the inoculation?
*a. To remove oxygen
b. To dissolve salts
c. To enrich the medium with carbon  dioxide
d. To destroy microorganisms
e. To sterilize the medium
818. A sample obtained from the wound of a patient with suspected gas anaerobic infection was inoculated on the Kitt-Tarozzi medium. Why must this medium be heated before the inoculation?
a. To dissolve salts
b. To enrich the medium with carbon  dioxide
c. To sterilize the medium
d. To destroy microorganisms
*e. To remove oxygen
819. A sample obtained from the wound of a patient with suspected gas anaerobic infection was inoculated on the Kitt-Tarozzi medium. Why must this medium be heated before the inoculation?
a. To sterilize the medium
b. To enrich the medium with carbon  dioxide
c. To dissolve salts
*d. To remove oxygen
e. To destroy microorganisms
820. A skin area turned red after an exposure to high temperature. What local circulatory disorder can be observed in the focus of the acute inflammation, resulting in the ''rubor''?
a. Ischemia
*b. Arterial hyperemia
c. Stasis
d. Venous hyperemia
e. Thrombosis
821. A skin area turned red after an exposure to high temperature. What local circulatory disorder can be observed in the focus of the acute inflammation, resulting in the ''rubor''?
a. Thrombosis
*b. Arterial hyperemia
c. Ischemia
d. Stasis
e. Venous hyperemia
822. A skin area turned red after an exposure to high temperature. What local circulatory disorder can be observed in the focus of the acute inflammation, resulting in the ''rubor''?
a. Venous hyperemia
b. Ischemia
*c. Arterial hyperemia
d. Stasis
e. Thrombosis
823. A solution being analyzed contains ammonium and sodium cations. What reagent can detect sodium cations in this solution?
a. Potassium hydrotartrate
b. Potassium benzoate
*c. Uranyl zinc acetate
d. Potassium oxalate
e. Potassium tetraiodomercurate(II)
824. A solution being analyzed contains ammonium and sodium cations. What reagent can detect sodium cations in this solution?
a. Potassium oxalate
*b. Uranyl zinc acetate
c. Potassium benzoate
d. Potassium hydrotartrate
e. Potassium tetraiodomercurate(II)
825. A solution being analyzed contains ammonium and sodium cations. What reagent can detect sodium cations in this solution?
a. Potassium oxalate
b. Potassium benzoate
c. Potassium tetraiodomercurate(II)
d. Potassium hydrotartrate
*e. Uranyl zinc acetate
826. A solution being analyzed contains calcium chloride and sodium bromide. What solution must be added to the solution being analyzed, to identify the calcium ions?
*a. Ammonium oxalate
b. Barium chloride
c. Potassium iodide
d. Ammonium acetate
e. Sodium chloride
827. A solution being analyzed contains calcium chloride and sodium bromide. What solution must be added to the solution being analyzed, to identify the calcium ions?
a. Ammonium acetate
b. Sodium chloride
c. Potassium iodide
d. Barium chloride
*e. Ammonium oxalate
828. A solution being analyzed contains calcium chloride and sodium bromide. What solution must be added to the solution being analyzed, to identify the calcium ions?
a. Barium chloride
*b. Ammonium oxalate
c. Potassium iodide
d. Sodium chloride
e. Ammonium acetate
829. A solution containing calcium and magnesium cations is titrated with Trilon B solution. Complexometric titration of these cations requires the following medium:
a. Formate buffer solution
*b. Ammonium buffer solution
c. Acetate buffer solution
d. Acidic solution
e. Neutral medium
830. A solution containing calcium and magnesium cations is titrated with Trilon B solution. Complexometric titration of these cations requires the following medium:
a. Formate buffer solution
b. Neutral medium
c. Acidic solution
d. Acetate buffer solution
*e. Ammonium buffer solution
831. A solution containing calcium and magnesium cations is titrated with Trilon B solution. Complexometric titration of these cations requires the following medium:
a. Neutral medium
b. Acetate buffer solution
c. Formate buffer solution
d. Acidic solution
*e. Ammonium buffer solution
832. A solution contains anions of organic acids. When a solution of iron(III) chloride was added, a pink-yellow precipitate formed. What anions are present in the solution?
*a. Benzoate anions
b. Oxalate anions
c. Tetraborate anions
d. Carbonate anions
e. Formate anions
833. A solution contains anions of organic acids. When a solution of iron(III) chloride was added, a pink-yellow precipitate formed. What anions are present in the solution?
a. Carbonate anions
b. Tetraborate anions
c. Formate anions
d. Oxalate anions
*e. Benzoate anions
834. A solution contains anions of organic acids. When a solution of iron(III) chloride was added, a pink-yellow precipitate formed. What anions are present in the solution?
a. Oxalate anions
*b. Benzoate anions
c. Formate anions
d. Carbonate anions
e. Tetraborate anions
835. A solution contains iodide and chloride ions. Choose the reagent to detect iodide ions:
*a. Chlorine water
b. Gypsum water
c. Hydrogen sulfide water
d. Limewater
e. Barium water
836. A solution contains iodide and chloride ions. Choose the reagent to detect iodide ions:
a. Gypsum water
b. Limewater
c. Hydrogen sulfide water
d. Barium water
*e. Chlorine water
837. A solution contains iodide and chloride ions. Choose the reagent to detect iodide ions:
a. Limewater
*b. Chlorine water
c. Gypsum water
d. Hydrogen sulfide water
e. Barium water
838. A solution of an alkali was added into the analyte solution and the resulting solution was heated. In the process, a black precipitate formed and a pungent-smelling gas was released. It indicates the presence of the following in the solution:
a. Ammonium and calcium ions
*b. Ammonium and mercury(I) ions
c. Ammonium and lead(II) ions
d. Ammonium and mercury(II) ions
e. Ammonium and stanium(II) ions
839. A solution of an alkali was added into the analyte solution and the resulting solution was heated. In the process, a black precipitate formed and a pungent-smelling gas was released. It indicates the presence of the following in the solution:
a. Ammonium and calcium ions
b. Ammonium and mercury(II) ions
c. Ammonium and lead(II) ions
*d. Ammonium and mercury(I) ions
e. Ammonium and stanium(II) ions
840. A solution of an alkali was added into the analyte solution and the resulting solution was heated. In the process, a black precipitate formed and a pungent-smelling gas was released. It indicates the presence of the following in the solution:
a. Ammonium and mercury(II) ions
*b. Ammonium and mercury(I) ions
c. Ammonium and lead(II) ions
d. Ammonium and stanium(II) ions
e. Ammonium and calcium ions
841. A specialist of the analytical laboratory performs direct iodometric determination of ascorbic acid. What indicator is used in this case?
*a. Starch
b. Phenolphthalein
c. Methyl red
d. Methyl orange
e. Diphenylamine
842. A specialist of the analytical laboratory performs direct iodometric determination of ascorbic acid. What indicator is used in this case?
a. Methyl orange
b. Phenolphthalein
c. Diphenylamine
*d. Starch
e. Methyl red
843. A specialist of the analytical laboratory performs direct iodometric determination of ascorbic acid. What indicator is used in this case?
a. Phenolphthalein
b. Methyl orange
c. Diphenylamine
*d. Starch
e. Methyl red
844. A specimen of Rosa majalis fruit was added to the morphological collection. This fruit consists of nutlets embedded in a matrix of fine stiff hairs on the inner surface of the succulent hypanthium. Name this fruit:
*a. Cynarrhodium
b. Hesperidium
c. Coenobium
d. Cremocarp
e. Pepo
845. A specimen of Rosa majalis fruit was added to the morphological collection. This fruit consists of nutlets embedded in a matrix of fine stiff hairs on the inner surface of the succulent hypanthium. Name this fruit:
a. Pepo
b. Cremocarp
*c. Cynarrhodium
d. Hesperidium
e. Coenobium
846. A specimen of Rosa majalis fruit was added to the morphological collection. This fruit consists of nutlets embedded in a matrix of fine stiff hairs on the inner surface of the succulent hypanthium. Name this fruit:
a. Pepo
b. Cremocarp
c. Coenobium
*d. Cynarrhodium
e. Hesperidium
847. A standard alkali solution is used to determine substances of acidic nature. This method is called:
*a. Alkalimetry
b. Acidimetry
c. Redoxymetry (Oxidimetry)
d. Gravimetry
e. Complexometry (Chelatometry)
848. A standard alkali solution is used to determine substances of acidic nature. This method is called:
a. Gravimetry
b. Acidimetry
*c. Alkalimetry
d. Redoxymetry (Oxidimetry)
e. Complexometry (Chelatometry)
849. A standard alkali solution is used to determine substances of acidic nature. This method is called:
a. Gravimetry
b. Redoxymetry (Oxidimetry)
c. Acidimetry
*d. Alkalimetry
e. Complexometry (Chelatometry)
850. A starch molecule contains residues of a certain monosaccharide. Name this monosaccharide.
a. D-fructose
b. D-galactose
c. D-mannose
*d. D-glucose
e. D-ribose
851. A starch molecule contains residues of a certain monosaccharide. Name this monosaccharide.
a. D-fructose
b. D-mannose
*c. D-glucose
d. D-galactose
e. D-ribose
852. A starch molecule contains residues of a certain monosaccharide. Name this monosaccharide.
a. D-mannose
b. D-galactose
c. D-fructose
*d. D-glucose
e. D-ribose
853. A sterile form of Inonotus obliquus xylotrophic fungus was sampled from the trunk of Betula pendula. Its alternative names include ''birch fungus'' and:
a. Ergot
b. Champignon
c. Fly agaric
*d. Chaga mushroom
e. Tinder fungus
854. A sterile form of Inonotus obliquus xylotrophic fungus was sampled from the trunk of Betula pendula. Its alternative names include ''birch fungus'' and:
a. Fly agaric
*b. Chaga mushroom
c. Tinder fungus
d. Champignon
e. Ergot
855. A sterile form of Inonotus obliquus xylotrophic fungus was sampled from the trunk of Betula pendula. Its alternative names include ''birch fungus'' and:
a. Tinder fungus
b. Fly agaric
c. Ergot
d. Champignon
*e. Chaga mushroom
856. A stool sample obtained from a patient with suspected shigellosis was inoculated on the Ploskirev nutrient medium. What will be the color of the colonies of the dysentery pathogen in this medium?
*a. Colorless
b. Yellow
c. Dark brown
d. Blue-violet
e. Red with a metallic sheen
857. A stool sample obtained from a patient with suspected shigellosis was inoculated on the Ploskirev nutrient medium. What will be the color of the colonies of the dysentery pathogen in this medium?
a. Blue-violet
b. Dark brown
c. Yellow
*d. Colorless
e. Red with a metallic sheen
858. A stool sample obtained from a patient with suspected shigellosis was inoculated on the Ploskirev nutrient medium. What will be the color of the colonies of the dysentery pathogen in this medium?
a. Yellow
b. Red with a metallic sheen
*c. Colorless
d. Blue-violet
e. Dark brown
859. A structural analog of vitamin PP (nicotinic acid) is used as an antituberculous medicine. Name this medicine:
*a. Isoniazid
b. Streptocide
c. Aspirin
d. Riboflavin
e. Tetracycline
860. A structural analog of vitamin PP (nicotinic acid) is used as an antituberculous medicine. Name this medicine:
a. Aspirin
b. Tetracycline
c. Streptocide
*d. Isoniazid
e. Riboflavin
861. A structural analog of vitamin PP (nicotinic acid) is used as an antituberculous medicine. Name this medicine:
a. Riboflavin
b. Streptocide
*c. Isoniazid
d. Aspirin
e. Tetracycline
862. A student was asked, what additional functions of the root are associated with the accumulation of nutrients. These functions are:
*a. Formation of storage roots and root  tubers
b. Respiration
c. Primary synthesis of organic substances
d. Maintaining the spatial position of a  plant
e. Symbiosis of the root and algae
863. A student was asked, what additional functions of the root are associated with the accumulation of nutrients. These functions are:
a. Respiration
b. Primary synthesis of organic substances
*c. Formation of storage roots and root  tubers
d. Symbiosis of the root and algae
e. Maintaining the spatial position of a  plant
864. A student was asked, what additional functions of the root are associated with the accumulation of nutrients. These functions are:
a. Respiration
b. Symbiosis of the root and algae
c. Primary synthesis of organic substances
d. Maintaining the spatial position of a  plant
*e. Formation of storage roots and root  tubers
865. A tumor of the adenohypophysis disturbs the synthesis of tropic hormones and causes acromegaly. What hormone would exhibit elevated levels in this case?
*a. Somatotropin
b. Luteinizing
c. Oxytocin
d. Vasopressin
e. Follicle-stimulating
866. A tumor of the adenohypophysis disturbs the synthesis of tropic hormones and causes acromegaly. What hormone would exhibit elevated levels in this case?
a. Oxytocin
b. Luteinizing
*c. Somatotropin
d. Vasopressin
e. Follicle-stimulating
867. A tumor of the adenohypophysis disturbs the synthesis of tropic hormones and causes acromegaly. What hormone would exhibit elevated levels in this case?
a. Vasopressin
b. Follicle-stimulating
c. Oxytocin
*d. Somatotropin
e. Luteinizing
868. A unilocular, single-seeded fruit has a pericarp with an exocarp, a juicy mesocarp, and a lignified endocarp. What plant is it characteristic of?
a. Leonurus quinquelobatus
b. Quercus robur
c. Coriandrum sativum
d. Potentilla erecta
*e. Armeniaca vulgaris
869. A unilocular, single-seeded fruit has a pericarp with an exocarp, a juicy mesocarp, and a lignified endocarp. What plant is it characteristic of?
a. Potentilla erecta
*b. Armeniaca vulgaris
c. Coriandrum sativum
d. Quercus robur
e. Leonurus quinquelobatus
870. A unilocular, single-seeded fruit has a pericarp with an exocarp, a juicy mesocarp, and a lignified endocarp. What plant is it characteristic of?
a. Quercus robur
b. Potentilla erecta
c. Coriandrum sativum
d. Leonurus quinquelobatus
*e. Armeniaca vulgaris
871. A woman came to a pediatrician complaining of deteriorating condition of her child. The disorder manifests in enlarged fontanelle, a delay in tooth eruption, and bone deformation. What medicine must be prescribed first in this case?
*a. Cholecalciferol
b. Proserin (Neostigmine)
c. Cyanocobalamin
d. Thiamine bromide
e. Allopurinol
872. A woman came to a pediatrician complaining of deteriorating condition of her child. The disorder manifests in enlarged fontanelle, a delay in tooth eruption, and bone deformation. What medicine must be prescribed first in this case?
a. Cyanocobalamin
b. Allopurinol
*c. Cholecalciferol
d. Thiamine bromide
e. Proserin (Neostigmine)
873. A woman came to a pediatrician complaining of deteriorating condition of her child. The disorder manifests in enlarged fontanelle, a delay in tooth eruption, and bone deformation. What medicine must be prescribed first in this case?
a. Proserin (Neostigmine)
b. Thiamine bromide
*c. Cholecalciferol
d. Allopurinol
e. Cyanocobalamin
874. A woman complains of elevated body temperature, weight loss, irritability, palpitations, and exophthalmos. Such changes are characteristic of the following endocrinopathy:
a. Hyperaldosteronism
*b. Hyperthyroidism
c. Hypothyroidism
d. Hypercorticism
e. Hypoaldosteronism
875. A woman complains of elevated body temperature, weight loss, irritability, palpitations, and exophthalmos. Such changes are characteristic of the following endocrinopathy:
a. Hypoaldosteronism
b. Hypercorticism
c. Hyperaldosteronism
*d. Hyperthyroidism
e. Hypothyroidism
876. A woman complains of elevated body temperature, weight loss, irritability, palpitations, and exophthalmos. Such changes are characteristic of the following endocrinopathy:
a. Hypoaldosteronism
b. Hypercorticism
c. Hypothyroidism
*d. Hyperthyroidism
e. Hyperaldosteronism
877. A woman complains of itching lips; they are reddened and covered in scabs and scales after she had been using new lipstick for two weeks. What allergic reactions result in this kind of disorders?
*a. Delayed
b. Cytotoxic
c. Anaphylactic
d. Stimulating
e. Immune complex
878. A woman complains of itching lips; they are reddened and covered in scabs and scales after she had been using new lipstick for two weeks. What allergic reactions result in this kind of disorders?
a. Cytotoxic
b. Stimulating
c. Anaphylactic
d. Immune complex
*e. Delayed
879. A woman complains of itching lips; they are reddened and covered in scabs and scales after she had been using new lipstick for two weeks. What allergic reactions result in this kind of disorders?
a. Immune complex
b. Anaphylactic
c. Stimulating
d. Cytotoxic
*e. Delayed
880. A woman has chronic heart failure with edema syndrome. Increased aldosterone levels were detected in her blood. What diuretic must be prescribed in this case?
a. Asparcam
b. Furosemide
c. Paracetamol
*d. Spironolactone
e. Theophylline
881. A woman has chronic heart failure with edema syndrome. Increased aldosterone levels were detected in her blood. What diuretic must be prescribed in this case?
a. Theophylline
*b. Spironolactone
c. Paracetamol
d. Furosemide
e. Asparcam
882. A woman has chronic heart failure with edema syndrome. Increased aldosterone levels were detected in her blood. What diuretic must be prescribed in this case?
a. Theophylline
b. Asparcam
*c. Spironolactone
d. Paracetamol
e. Furosemide
883. A woman is to be prescribed a narcotic analgesic for labor pain relief. What drug is indicated in this case?
*a. Promedol (Trimeperidine)
b. Fentanyl
c. Morphine
d. Codeine
e. Papaveretum (Omnopon)
884. A woman is to be prescribed a narcotic analgesic for labor pain relief. What drug is indicated in this case?
*a. Promedol (Trimeperidine)
b. Morphine
c. Papaveretum (Omnopon)
d. Codeine
e. Fentanyl
885. A woman is to be prescribed a narcotic analgesic for labor pain relief. What drug is indicated in this case?
a. Morphine
b. Codeine
c. Papaveretum (Omnopon)
d. Fentanyl
*e. Promedol (Trimeperidine)
886. A woman presents with poor twilight vision and dry conjunctiva and cornea. What vitamin deficiency can cause such disorders?
a. C
*b. А
c. B_12
d. В
e. D
887. A woman presents with poor twilight vision and dry conjunctiva and cornea. What vitamin deficiency can cause such disorders?
a. D
*b. А
c. B_12
d. В
e. C
888. A woman suffering from neurosis has disturbed sleep. What drug is optimal for insomnia treatment?
*a. Nitrazepam
b. Valerian tincture
c. Aethaminalum-natrium (Pentobarbital)
d. Bromisoval
e. Phenobarbital
889. A woman suffering from neurosis has disturbed sleep. What drug is optimal for insomnia treatment?
a. Bromisoval
b. Aethaminalum-natrium (Pentobarbital)
*c. Nitrazepam
d. Phenobarbital
e. Valerian tincture
890. A woman suffering from neurosis has disturbed sleep. What drug is optimal for insomnia treatment?
a. Bromisoval
b. Phenobarbital
*c. Nitrazepam
d. Aethaminalum-natrium (Pentobarbital)
e. Valerian tincture
891. A woman underwent a gastroduodeno-scopy that revealed decreased functioning of the gastroesophageal junction with reflux of gastric contents into the esophagus. What sign is the main indicator of this disorder?
*a. Heartburn
b. Problematic swallowing
c. Nausea
d. Diarrhea
e. Palpitations
892. A woman underwent a gastroduodeno-scopy that revealed decreased functioning of the gastroesophageal junction with reflux of gastric contents into the esophagus. What sign is the main indicator of this disorder?
a. Diarrhea
b. Palpitations
c. Nausea
*d. Heartburn
e. Problematic swallowing
893. A woman underwent a gastroduodeno-scopy that revealed decreased functioning of the gastroesophageal junction with reflux of gastric contents into the esophagus. What sign is the main indicator of this disorder?
a. Problematic swallowing
b. Palpitations
c. Diarrhea
d. Nausea
*e. Heartburn
894. A woman underwent gastric resection and 5 years later was diagnosed with В_12-deficiency anemia. What blood cells are typically present in this type of anemia?
*a. Megalocytes
b. Annulocytes
c. Microcytes
d. Reticulocytes
e. Echinocytes
895. A woman underwent gastric resection and 5 years later was diagnosed with В_12-deficiency anemia. What blood cells are typically present in this type of anemia?
*a. Megalocytes
b. Microcytes
c. Echinocytes
d. Reticulocytes
e. Annulocytes
896. A woman underwent gastric resection and 5 years later was diagnosed with В_12-deficiency anemia. What blood cells are typically present in this type of anemia?
a. Microcytes
b. Reticulocytes
c. Annulocytes
*d. Megalocytes
e. Echinocytes
897. A woman with candidomycosis was prescribed a drug that is used in cases of fungal pathology of any localization and can cause diarrhea and toxic liver damage. What drug did the doctor prescribe in this case?
*a. Fluconazole
b. Mebendazole
c. Amoxicillin
d. Bicillin-5
e. Chingamine (Chloroquine)
898. A woman with candidomycosis was prescribed a drug that is used in cases of fungal pathology of any localization and can cause diarrhea and toxic liver damage. What drug did the doctor prescribe in this case?
a. Bicillin-5
b. Chingamine (Chloroquine)
c. Mebendazole
*d. Fluconazole
e. Amoxicillin
899. A woman with candidomycosis was prescribed a drug that is used in cases of fungal pathology of any localization and can cause diarrhea and toxic liver damage. What drug did the doctor prescribe in this case?
a. Chingamine (Chloroquine)
b. Mebendazole
c. Amoxicillin
*d. Fluconazole
e. Bicillin-5
900. A woman with chronic heart failure developed an edematous syndrome. Increased aldosterone levels were detected in her blood. What drug must be prescribed in this case?
a. Metoprolol
b. Ketamine
*c. Spironolactone
d. Proserine (Neostigmine)
e. Aceclidine
901. A woman with chronic heart failure developed an edematous syndrome. Increased aldosterone levels were detected in her blood. What drug must be prescribed in this case?
a. Metoprolol
b. Proserine (Neostigmine)
c. Ketamine
*d. Spironolactone
e. Aceclidine
902. A woman with chronic heart failure developed an edematous syndrome. Increased aldosterone levels were detected in her blood. What drug must be prescribed in this case?
a. Proserine (Neostigmine)
*b. Spironolactone
c. Metoprolol
d. Aceclidine
e. Ketamine
903. A woman with essential hypertension developed a dry hacking cough as a result of taking angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors. What drugs that inhibit the renin-angiotensin system should be prescribed in this case?
*a. Angiotensin II receptor antagonists
b. Diuretics
c. Sympatholytics
d. Calcium channel blockers
e. Beta-blockers
904. A woman with essential hypertension developed a dry hacking cough as a result of taking angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors. What drugs that inhibit the renin-angiotensin system should be prescribed in this case?
a. Calcium channel blockers
b. Diuretics
*c. Angiotensin II receptor antagonists
d. Beta-blockers
e. Sympatholytics
905. A woman with essential hypertension developed a dry hacking cough as a result of taking angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors. What drugs that inhibit the renin-angiotensin system should be prescribed in this case?
a. Diuretics
b. Beta-blockers
c. Sympatholytics
d. Calcium channel blockers
*e. Angiotensin II receptor antagonists
906. A woman with peptic ulcer disease of the stomach was prescribed antibacterial treatment. It is aimed at the following pathogen:
*a. H. pylori
b. St. aureus
c. Cl. trachomatis
d. E) colli
e. Cl. perfringens
907. A woman with peptic ulcer disease of the stomach was prescribed antibacterial treatment. It is aimed at the following pathogen:
a. Cl. perfringens
b. Cl. trachomatis
c. St. aureus
d. E) colli
*e. H. pylori
908. A woman with peptic ulcer disease of the stomach was prescribed antibacterial treatment. It is aimed at the following pathogen:
a. E) colli
*b. H. pylori
c. Cl. trachomatis
d. St. aureus
e. Cl. perfringens
909. A woman with trichomoniasis was prescribed a drug that is an imidazole derivative. Name this drug:
*a. Metronidazole
b. Iodinol
c. Miramistin
d. Resorcin
e. Ampicillin
910. A woman with trichomoniasis was prescribed a drug that is an imidazole derivative. Name this drug:
a. Ampicillin
b. Resorcin
c. Iodinol
*d. Metronidazole
e. Miramistin
911. A woman with trichomoniasis was prescribed a drug that is an imidazole derivative. Name this drug:
a. Miramistin
*b. Metronidazole
c. Iodinol
d. Ampicillin
e. Resorcin
912. A woman with type 1 diabetes mellitus developed hyperglycemic coma. Examination revealed metabolic acidosis. This condition developed because of accumulation of the following in the blood:
*a. Ketone bodies
b. Indirect bilirubin
c. Ammonium ions
d. Residual nitrogen
e. Bile acids
913. A woman with type 1 diabetes mellitus developed hyperglycemic coma. Examination revealed metabolic acidosis. This condition developed because of accumulation of the following in the blood:
a. Indirect bilirubin
*b. Ketone bodies
c. Residual nitrogen
d. Bile acids
e. Ammonium ions
914. A woman with type 1 diabetes mellitus developed hyperglycemic coma. Examination revealed metabolic acidosis. This condition developed because of accumulation of the following in the blood:
a. Residual nitrogen
b. Bile acids
*c. Ketone bodies
d. Ammonium ions
e. Indirect bilirubin
915. A woman, who during the 5th-10th weeks of her pregnancy had been taking sodium valproate for treatment of her epilepsy, gave birth to a child with pathology of the vertebral column (split spine). What side effect of the drug caused such malformation?
*a. Teratogenic
b. Mutagenic
c. Sensitizing
d. Fetotoxic
e. Embryotoxic
916. A woman, who during the 5th-10th weeks of her pregnancy had been taking sodium valproate for treatment of her epilepsy, gave birth to a child with pathology of the vertebral column (split spine). What side effect of the drug caused such malformation?
a. Sensitizing
*b. Teratogenic
c. Embryotoxic
d. Fetotoxic
e. Mutagenic
917. A woman, who during the 5th-10th weeks of her pregnancy had been taking sodium valproate for treatment of her epilepsy, gave birth to a child with pathology of the vertebral column (split spine). What side effect of the drug caused such malformation?
a. Sensitizing
b. Mutagenic
c. Fetotoxic
*d. Teratogenic
e. Embryotoxic
918. ACE inhibitors cannot be used simultaneously with a certain group of diuretics. Name this group of diuretics.
*a. Potassium-sparing diuretics
b. Thiazide diuretics
c. Osmotic diuretics
d. Loop diuretics
e. Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors
919. ACE inhibitors cannot be used simultaneously with a certain group of diuretics. Name this group of diuretics.
a. Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors
b. Loop diuretics
*c. Potassium-sparing diuretics
d. Thiazide diuretics
e. Osmotic diuretics
920. ACE inhibitors cannot be used simultaneously with a certain group of diuretics. Name this group of diuretics.
a. Osmotic diuretics
b. Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors
c. Thiazide diuretics
*d. Potassium-sparing diuretics
e. Loop diuretics
921. According to Hueckel's rule an organic compound will have aromatic properties if:
*a. Its molecular structure contains a planar cycle with a closed conjugated system that contains (4n+2) of pi electrons, where n = 0,1,2,3, etc.
b. Its molecules are composed exclusively of carbon and hydrogen atoms that form a linear carbon chain
c. There are condensed nuclei in the molecule
d. There is only one substituent in the molecule
e. There is a cyclohexane ring in the molecule
922. According to Hueckel's rule an organic compound will have aromatic properties if:
*a. Its molecular structure contains a planar cycle with a closed conjugated system that contains (4n+2) of pi electrons, where n = 0,1,2,3, etc.
b. There is a cyclohexane ring in the molecule
c. There are condensed nuclei in the molecule
d. There is only one substituent in the molecule
e. Its molecules are composed exclusively of carbon and hydrogen atoms that form a linear carbon chain
923. According to Hueckel's rule an organic compound will have aromatic properties if:
a. There is only one substituent in the molecule
b. There is a cyclohexane ring in the molecule
*c. Its molecular structure contains a planar cycle with a closed conjugated system that contains (4n+2) of pi electrons, where n = 0,1,2,3, etc.
d. There are condensed nuclei in the molecule
e. Its molecules are composed exclusively of carbon and hydrogen atoms that form a linear carbon chain
924. According to the Bancroft's rule, the dispersion medium of an emulsion will be the liquid, with which the emulsifier:
a. Chemically interacts
*b. Has affinity
c. Forms a precipitate
d. Forms an insoluble compound
e. Forms a colored compound
925. According to the Bancroft's rule, the dispersion medium of an emulsion will be the liquid, with which the emulsifier:
a. Chemically interacts
b. Forms a precipitate
c. Forms a colored compound
*d. Has affinity
e. Forms an insoluble compound
926. According to the Bancroft's rule, the dispersion medium of an emulsion will be the liquid, with which the emulsifier:
a. Forms a colored compound
b. Chemically interacts
c. Forms a precipitate
*d. Has affinity
e. Forms an insoluble compound
927. According to the Rayleigh equation, the intensity of scattered light is inversely proportional to the wavelength of:
a. Incident light
b. Incident light (fifth power)
*c. Incident light (fourth power)
d. Incident light (third power)
e. Incident light (second power)
928. According to the Rayleigh equation, the intensity of scattered light is inversely proportional to the wavelength of:
a. Incident light (fifth power)
*b. Incident light (fourth power)
c. Incident light
d. Incident light (second power)
e. Incident light (third power)
929. According to the Rayleigh equation, the intensity of scattered light is inversely proportional to the wavelength of:
a. Incident light (second power)
b. Incident light (fifth power)
*c. Incident light (fourth power)
d. Incident light (third power)
e. Incident light
930. According to the Smoluchowski coagulation theory, the process of coagulation can be described with the kinetic equation of:
a. The fraction order
*b. The second order
c. The first order
d. The zero order
e. The third order
931. According to the Smoluchowski coagulation theory, the process of coagulation can be described with the kinetic equation of:
a. The third order
b. The fraction order
c. The zero order
*d. The second order
e. The first order
932. According to the Smoluchowski coagulation theory, the process of coagulation can be described with the kinetic equation of:
a. The zero order
b. The third order
c. The fraction order
d. The first order
*e. The second order
933. According to the Smoluchowski theory of rapid coagulation, the coagulation process can be described using the following type of kinetic equation:
*a. Second-order equation
b. Fractional-order equation
c. First-order equation
d. Zero-order equation
e. Third-order equation
934. According to the Smoluchowski theory of rapid coagulation, the coagulation process can be described using the following type of kinetic equation:
a. First-order equation
b. Fractional-order equation
c. Third-order equation
*d. Second-order equation
e. Zero-order equation
935. According to the Smoluchowski theory of rapid coagulation, the coagulation process can be described using the following type of kinetic equation:
a. First-order equation
b. Zero-order equation
*c. Second-order equation
d. Fractional-order equation
e. Third-order equation
936. Acetylsalicylic acid is used in treatment of rheumatism. What biochemical links are affected by acetylsalicylic acid?
a. Inhibits glycolysis
b. Stimulates prostaglandines synthesis
c. Stimulates cholesterol synthesis
*d. Inhibits prostaglandines synthesis
e. Stimulates gluconeogenesis
937. Acetylsalicylic acid is used in treatment of rheumatism. What biochemical links are affected by acetylsalicylic acid?
a. Stimulates cholesterol synthesis
b. Inhibits glycolysis
*c. Inhibits prostaglandines synthesis
d. Stimulates gluconeogenesis
e. Stimulates prostaglandines synthesis
938. Acetylsalicylic acid is used in treatment of rheumatism. What biochemical links are affected by acetylsalicylic acid?
a. Stimulates prostaglandines synthesis
b. Stimulates gluconeogenesis
c. Inhibits glycolysis
*d. Inhibits prostaglandines synthesis
e. Stimulates cholesterol synthesis
939. Adrenaline is used to prolong the action of novocaine (procaine) during infiltration anesthesia. What effect of adrenaline provides this prolongation?
a. Functional suppression of nerve endings and conductors
b. Potentiation of novocaine (procaine) action at the level of central nervous system
*c. Vasoconstriction
d. Vasodilation
e. Inhibition of tissue esterases
940. Adrenaline is used to prolong the action of novocaine (procaine) during infiltration anesthesia. What effect of adrenaline provides this prolongation?
a. Inhibition of tissue esterases
b. Functional suppression of nerve endings and conductors
*c. Vasoconstriction
d. Vasodilation
e. Potentiation of novocaine (procaine) action at the level of central nervous system
941. Adrenaline is used to prolong the action of novocaine (procaine) during infiltration anesthesia. What effect of adrenaline provides this prolongation?
a. Potentiation of novocaine (procaine) action at the level of central nervous system
*b. Vasoconstriction
c. Functional suppression of nerve endings and conductors
d. Vasodilation
e. Inhibition of tissue esterases
942. Aerosols are one of the dosage forms. Name the phenomenon when aerosol particles move in the direction of decreasing temperature.
a. Electrophoresis
b. Peptization
c. Photophoresis
d. Sedimentation
*e. Thermophoresis
943. Aerosols are one of the dosage forms. Name the phenomenon when aerosol particles move in the direction of decreasing temperature.
a. Electrophoresis
b. Photophoresis
c. Peptization
*d. Thermophoresis
e. Sedimentation
944. Aerosols are one of the dosage forms. Name the phenomenon when aerosol particles move in the direction of decreasing temperature.
a. Sedimentation
b. Electrophoresis
c. Photophoresis
d. Peptization
*e. Thermophoresis
945. After a casual sexual contact, a 30-year-old man visited a hospital complaining of a painless ulcer with smooth edges on the head of his penis. What pathogen has caused the patient's disease in this case?
*a. Treponema
b. Chlamydia
c. Ureaplasma
d. Neisseria
e. Mycoplasma
946. After a casual sexual contact, a 30-year-old man visited a hospital complaining of a painless ulcer with smooth edges on the head of his penis. What pathogen has caused the patient's disease in this case?
a. Mycoplasma
b. Chlamydia
c. Neisseria
d. Ureaplasma
*e. Treponema
947. After a casual sexual contact, a 30-year-old man visited a hospital complaining of a painless ulcer with smooth edges on the head of his penis. What pathogen has caused the patient's disease in this case?
a. Neisseria
b. Ureaplasma
*c. Treponema
d. Chlamydia
e. Mycoplasma
948. After a stress, a woman has problems sleeping. What medicine is preferable for the treatment of insomnia in this case?
a. Barbital
b. Aminazine (Chlorpromazine)
c. Phenobarbital
*d. Nitrazepam
e. Chloral hydrate
949. After a stress, a woman has problems sleeping. What medicine is preferable for the treatment of insomnia in this case?
a. Barbital
b. Phenobarbital
*c. Nitrazepam
d. Chloral hydrate
e. Aminazine (Chlorpromazine)
950. After a stress, a woman has problems sleeping. What medicine is preferable for the treatment of insomnia in this case?
a. Phenobarbital
b. Chloral hydrate
c. Barbital
*d. Nitrazepam
e. Aminazine (Chlorpromazine)
951. After a stroke the patient should be prescribed a drug that would increase energy transfer in the brain cells and stimulate the central nervous system. Name this drug:
*a. Piracetam
b. Phenobarbital
c. Ketorolac
d. Doxylamine
e. Phenazepam
952. After a stroke the patient should be prescribed a drug that would increase energy transfer in the brain cells and stimulate the central nervous system. Name this drug:
a. Doxylamine
*b. Piracetam
c. Phenazepam
d. Ketorolac
e. Phenobarbital
953. After a stroke the patient should be prescribed a drug that would increase energy transfer in the brain cells and stimulate the central nervous system. Name this drug:
a. Ketorolac
b. Phenobarbital
*c. Piracetam
d. Phenazepam
e. Doxylamine
954. After a subtotal gastric resection, the patient developed B_12-deficiency anemia. What cells in a blood smear are typical in this pathology?
*a. Megaloblasts
b. Erythroblasts
c. Microcytes
d. Anulocytes
e. Normoblasts
955. After a subtotal gastric resection, the patient developed B_12-deficiency anemia. What cells in a blood smear are typical in this pathology?
a. Normoblasts
b. Erythroblasts
*c. Megaloblasts
d. Microcytes
e. Anulocytes
956. After a subtotal gastric resection, the patient developed B_12-deficiency anemia. What cells in a blood smear are typical in this pathology?
a. Normoblasts
b. Erythroblasts
c. Microcytes
d. Anulocytes
*e. Megaloblasts
957. After a traffic accident the driver presents with increased blood glucose. What mechanism leads to hyperglycemia in this case?
*a. Sympathoadrenal system activation
b. Decreased tone of parasympathetic nervous system
c. Decreased production of insulin
d. Increased production of somatotropic hormone
e. Decreased production of glucagon
958. After a traffic accident the driver presents with increased blood glucose. What mechanism leads to hyperglycemia in this case?
a. Increased production of somatotropic hormone
b. Decreased production of glucagon
c. Decreased production of insulin
d. Decreased tone of parasympathetic nervous system
*e. Sympathoadrenal system activation
959. After a traffic accident the driver presents with increased blood glucose. What mechanism leads to hyperglycemia in this case?
a. Increased production of somatotropic hormone
b. Decreased production of insulin
c. Decreased tone of parasympathetic nervous system
d. Decreased production of glucagon
*e. Sympathoadrenal system activation
960. After accidentally eating inedible mushrooms, a woman presents with disturbed consciousness, anuria, arterial hypotension, and hyperazotemia. What pathological condition can be characterized by these symptoms?
a. Acute diffuse glomerulonephritis
*b. Acute renal failure
c. Urolithiasis
d. Acute pyelonephritis
e. Chronic renal failure
961. After accidentally eating inedible mushrooms, a woman presents with disturbed consciousness, anuria, arterial hypotension, and hyperazotemia. What pathological condition can be characterized by these symptoms?
a. Chronic renal failure
*b. Acute renal failure
c. Urolithiasis
d. Acute pyelonephritis
e. Acute diffuse glomerulonephritis
962. After accidentally eating inedible mushrooms, a woman presents with disturbed consciousness, anuria, arterial hypotension, and hyperazotemia. What pathological condition can be characterized by these symptoms?
a. Chronic renal failure
b. Urolithiasis
c. Acute diffuse glomerulonephritis
*d. Acute renal failure
e. Acute pyelonephritis
963. After acute nitrite poisoning, the patient was diagnosed with acquired toxic hemolytic anemia. A large amount of regenerative forms of erythrocytes were detected in the patient's blood smear. Name these cells.
a. Annulocytes (Codocytes)
b. Schistocytes
*c. Reticulocytes
d. Microcytes
e. Drepanocytes
964. After acute nitrite poisoning, the patient was diagnosed with acquired toxic hemolytic anemia. A large amount of regenerative forms of erythrocytes were detected in the patient's blood smear. Name these cells.
a. Microcytes
*b. Reticulocytes
c. Drepanocytes
d. Schistocytes
e. Annulocytes (Codocytes)
965. After acute nitrite poisoning, the patient was diagnosed with acquired toxic hemolytic anemia. A large amount of regenerative forms of erythrocytes were detected in the patient's blood smear. Name these cells.
a. Microcytes
b. Annulocytes (Codocytes)
*c. Reticulocytes
d. Schistocytes
e. Drepanocytes
966. After administration of a drug, the patient presents with itching, skin rash, difficulty breathing, blood pressure of 70/40 mm Hg, and dizziness. What allergic reaction according to the Coombs-Gell classification has likely developed in the patient?
a. Delayed hypersensitivity reaction
b. Arthus reaction
c. Stimulatory hypersensitivity reaction
*d. Anaphylactic reaction
e. Cytolysis
967. After administration of a drug, the patient presents with itching, skin rash, difficulty breathing, blood pressure of 70/40 mm Hg, and dizziness. What allergic reaction according to the Coombs-Gell classification has likely developed in the patient?
a. Delayed hypersensitivity reaction
b. Cytolysis
c. Stimulatory hypersensitivity reaction
d. Arthus reaction
*e. Anaphylactic reaction
968. After administration of a drug, the patient presents with itching, skin rash, difficulty breathing, blood pressure of 70/40 mm Hg, and dizziness. What allergic reaction according to the Coombs-Gell classification has likely developed in the patient?
a. Stimulatory hypersensitivity reaction
b. Delayed hypersensitivity reaction
c. Arthus reaction
*d. Anaphylactic reaction
e. Cytolysis
969. After an 8-year-old boy had eaten some strawberries he developed red itching spots on his skin, urticaria. What bioactive substance causes the itching sensation in this case?
a. Cathepsin
b. Tissue hyaluronidase
*c. Histamine
d. Complement component C3а
e. Prostaglandin Е2
970. After an 8-year-old boy had eaten some strawberries he developed red itching spots on his skin, urticaria. What bioactive substance causes the itching sensation in this case?
a. Tissue hyaluronidase
b. Prostaglandin Е2
*c. Histamine
d. Complement component C3а
e. Cathepsin
971. After an 8-year-old boy had eaten some strawberries he developed red itching spots on his skin, urticaria. What bioactive substance causes the itching sensation in this case?
a. Tissue hyaluronidase
b. Prostaglandin Е2
c. Complement component C3а
d. Cathepsin
*e. Histamine
972. After an acute myocardial infarction, the doctor recommended the patient to take acetylsalicylic acid in the dose of 80--100 mg for 3 months. The doctor expects this drug to have the following effect in this case:
a. Analgesic
b. Spasmolytic
c. Anti-inflammatory
*d. Antiplatelet
e. Antipyretic
973. After an acute myocardial infarction, the doctor recommended the patient to take acetylsalicylic acid in the dose of 80--100 mg for 3 months. The doctor expects this drug to have the following effect in this case:
a. Anti-inflammatory
b. Spasmolytic
c. Antipyretic
d. Analgesic
*e. Antiplatelet
974. After an acute myocardial infarction, the doctor recommended the patient to take acetylsalicylic acid in the dose of 80--100 mg for 3 months. The doctor expects this drug to have the following effect in this case:
a. Spasmolytic
b. Analgesic
c. Antipyretic
*d. Antiplatelet
e. Anti-inflammatory
975. After eating early vegetables that had high nitrite levels, a child developed hemic hypoxia. It is caused by accumulation of the following substance:
*a. Methemoglobin
b. Carboxyhemoglobin
c. Oxyhemoglobin
d. Carbhemoglobin
e. Deoxyhemoglobin
976. After eating early vegetables that had high nitrite levels, a child developed hemic hypoxia. It is caused by accumulation of the following substance:
a. Carbhemoglobin
b. Oxyhemoglobin
c. Carboxyhemoglobin
d. Deoxyhemoglobin
*e. Methemoglobin
977. After eating early vegetables that had high nitrite levels, a child developed hemic hypoxia. It is caused by accumulation of the following substance:
a. Carboxyhemoglobin
b. Oxyhemoglobin
c. Deoxyhemoglobin
*d. Methemoglobin
e. Carbhemoglobin
978. After examination the patient was diagnosed with tick-borne encephalitis. What route of transmission is characteristic of this disease?
*a. Vector-borne transmission
b. Vertical transmission
c. Fecal-oral transmission
d. Airborne droplet transmission
e. Parenteral transmission
979. After examination the patient was diagnosed with tick-borne encephalitis. What route of transmission is characteristic of this disease?
a. Airborne droplet transmission
*b. Vector-borne transmission
c. Fecal-oral transmission
d. Vertical transmission
e. Parenteral transmission
980. After examination the patient was diagnosed with tick-borne encephalitis. What route of transmission is characteristic of this disease?
a. Airborne droplet transmission
b. Vertical transmission
c. Parenteral transmission
d. Fecal-oral transmission
*e. Vector-borne transmission
981. After examination, the patient was diagnosed with alkaptonuria. What enzyme is deficient in this case, causing this pathology?
*a. Homogentisic acid oxidase
b. Monoamine oxidase
c. Tyrosinase
d. Phenylalanine hydroxylase
e. Thyroxine hydroxylase
982. After examination, the patient was diagnosed with alkaptonuria. What enzyme is deficient in this case, causing this pathology?
a. Thyroxine hydroxylase
*b. Homogentisic acid oxidase
c. Phenylalanine hydroxylase
d. Monoamine oxidase
e. Tyrosinase
983. After examination, the patient was diagnosed with alkaptonuria. What enzyme is deficient in this case, causing this pathology?
a. Tyrosinase
b. Thyroxine hydroxylase
c. Phenylalanine hydroxylase
*d. Homogentisic acid oxidase
e. Monoamine oxidase
984. After ishemic stroke the patient was prescribed a drug to improve his intellectual functioning and memory. What drug would he obtain in the pharmacy?
*a. Piracetam
b. Diphenin (Phenytoin)
c. -
d. Tabex (Cytisine)
e. Metoclopramide
985. After ishemic stroke the patient was prescribed a drug to improve his intellectual functioning and memory. What drug would he obtain in the pharmacy?
a. Tabex (Cytisine)
b. -
c. Diphenin (Phenytoin)
d. Metoclopramide
*e. Piracetam
986. After ishemic stroke the patient was prescribed a drug to improve his intellectual functioning and memory. What drug would he obtain in the pharmacy?
a. Tabex (Cytisine)
b. Metoclopramide
c. Diphenin (Phenytoin)
*d. Piracetam
e. -
987. After obtaining an antitoxic serum, its activity must be determined. For this purpose, one needs to use a reaction that is based on a combination of equal doses of immune serum and anatoxin. Name this reaction.
a. Complement fixation
b. Hemadsorption
c. Hemagglutination
d. Precipitation
*e. Flocculation
988. After obtaining an antitoxic serum, its activity must be determined. For this purpose, one needs to use a reaction that is based on a combination of equal doses of immune serum and anatoxin. Name this reaction.
a. Hemagglutination
b. Complement fixation
c. Hemadsorption
*d. Flocculation
e. Precipitation
989. After obtaining an antitoxic serum, its activity must be determined. For this purpose, one needs to use a reaction that is based on a combination of equal doses of immune serum and anatoxin. Name this reaction.
a. Precipitation
b. Hemagglutination
c. Hemadsorption
*d. Flocculation
e. Complement fixation
990. After parenteral administration of iron preparations, the patient presents with pain behind the sternum and redness of the face and neck. What drug should be administered in this case?
a. Cyanocobalamin
b. Ascorbic acid
*c. Deferoxamine
d. Vitamin A
e. Folic acid
991. After parenteral administration of iron preparations, the patient presents with pain behind the sternum and redness of the face and neck. What drug should be administered in this case?
a. Vitamin A
b. Cyanocobalamin
c. Ascorbic acid
*d. Deferoxamine
e. Folic acid
992. After severe emotional strain a 53-year-old man suddenly developed acute pain in the heart area, which irradiates to the left hand, to the neck, and under the left scapula. He noted numbness of his left hand. His face is pale and covered in cold sweat. Nitroglycerine administration stopped the pain attack after 10 minutes had passed. What is the most likely disease in this case?
*a. Angina pectoris
b. Somatoform autonomic dysfunction
c. Myocardial infarction
d. Stroke
e. Pulmonary embolism
993. After severe emotional strain a 53-year-old man suddenly developed acute pain in the heart area, which irradiates to the left hand, to the neck, and under the left scapula. He noted numbness of his left hand. His face is pale and covered in cold sweat. Nitroglycerine administration stopped the pain attack after 10 minutes had passed. What is the most likely disease in this case?
a. Pulmonary embolism
b. Somatoform autonomic dysfunction
c. Stroke
*d. Angina pectoris
e. Myocardial infarction
994. After severe emotional strain a 53-year-old man suddenly developed acute pain in the heart area, which irradiates to the left hand, to the neck, and under the left scapula. He noted numbness of his left hand. His face is pale and covered in cold sweat. Nitroglycerine administration stopped the pain attack after 10 minutes had passed. What is the most likely disease in this case?
a. Stroke
*b. Angina pectoris
c. Somatoform autonomic dysfunction
d. Pulmonary embolism
e. Myocardial infarction
995. After the pus sample taken from the urethra had been inoculated on ascitic agar, it resulted in growth of round transparent colonies. Microscopy of the colonies shows gram-negative kidney bean-shaped diplococci. What causative agent is it?
*a. Gonococcus
b. Streptococcus
c. Pneumococcus
d. Meningococcus
e. Micrococcus
996. After the pus sample taken from the urethra had been inoculated on ascitic agar, it resulted in growth of round transparent colonies. Microscopy of the colonies shows gram-negative kidney bean-shaped diplococci. What causative agent is it?
a. Meningococcus
b. Streptococcus
c. Micrococcus
*d. Gonococcus
e. Pneumococcus
997. After the pus sample taken from the urethra had been inoculated on ascitic agar, it resulted in growth of round transparent colonies. Microscopy of the colonies shows gram-negative kidney bean-shaped diplococci. What causative agent is it?
a. Pneumococcus
b. Micrococcus
*c. Gonococcus
d. Streptococcus
e. Meningococcus
998. After the total resection of the stomach, the patient developed severe В_12-deficiency anemia with impaired hematopoiesis and altered erythrocytes appearing in the blood. What forms of erythrocytes indicate this disease in the patient, if they are present in the blood?
*a. Megalocytes
b. Normocytes
c. Microcytes
d. Ovalocytes
e. Annulocytes (codocytes)
999. After the total resection of the stomach, the patient developed severe В_12-deficiency anemia with impaired hematopoiesis and altered erythrocytes appearing in the blood. What forms of erythrocytes indicate this disease in the patient, if they are present in the blood?
a. Annulocytes (codocytes)
b. Ovalocytes
*c. Megalocytes
d. Normocytes
e. Microcytes
1000. After the total resection of the stomach, the patient developed severe В_12-deficiency anemia with impaired hematopoiesis and altered erythrocytes appearing in the blood. What forms of erythrocytes indicate this disease in the patient, if they are present in the blood?
a. Microcytes
b. Annulocytes (codocytes)
c. Ovalocytes
d. Normocytes
*e. Megalocytes
1001. Against the background of cardiac glycoside treatment, a person developed an arrhythmia. The doctor prescribed the patient a potassium medicine that successfully normalized the heart rate. Name this potassium medicine.
*a. Asparcam
b. Novocainamide
c. Metoprolol
d. Verapamil
e. Amiodarone
1002. Against the background of cardiac glycoside treatment, a person developed an arrhythmia. The doctor prescribed the patient a potassium medicine that successfully normalized the heart rate. Name this potassium medicine.
a. Metoprolol
*b. Asparcam
c. Novocainamide
d. Verapamil
e. Amiodarone
1003. Against the background of cardiac glycoside treatment, a person developed an arrhythmia. The doctor prescribed the patient a potassium medicine that successfully normalized the heart rate. Name this potassium medicine.
a. Metoprolol
b. Amiodarone
*c. Asparcam
d. Novocainamide
e. Verapamil
1004. Against the background of treatment with antihypertensive drugs, a woman developed a dry cough. What drugs have caused this side effect?
a. Calcium channel blockers
b. Diuretics
c. Ganglioblockers
d. alpha-blockers
*e. ACE inhibitors
1005. Against the background of treatment with antihypertensive drugs, a woman developed a dry cough. What drugs have caused this side effect?
a. Calcium channel blockers
b. Ganglioblockers
*c. ACE inhibitors
d. alpha-blockers
e. Diuretics
1006. Against the background of treatment with antihypertensive drugs, a woman developed a dry cough. What drugs have caused this side effect?
a. Diuretics
b. alpha-blockers
c. Ganglioblockers
*d. ACE inhibitors
e. Calcium channel blockers
1007. Aggression enzymes are characteristic of pathogenic microorganisms. Select one such aggression enzyme from the list.
*a. Lecithinase
b. Lyase
c. Lactamase
d. Transferase
e. Catalase
1008. Aggression enzymes are characteristic of pathogenic microorganisms. Select one such aggression enzyme from the list.
a. Lyase
b. Transferase
c. Lactamase
d. Catalase
*e. Lecithinase
1009. Aggression enzymes are characteristic of pathogenic microorganisms. Select one such aggression enzyme from the list.
a. Transferase
b. Lyase
*c. Lecithinase
d. Catalase
e. Lactamase
1010. Air contamination with pathological microorganisms can be determined by the presence of indicator bacteria. Specify the bacteria that indicate immediate epidemiologic danger:
a. Micrococci
*b. Hemolytic streptococci
c. Mold fungi
d. Sarcinae
e. Yeast fungi
1011. Air contamination with pathological microorganisms can be determined by the presence of indicator bacteria. Specify the bacteria that indicate immediate epidemiologic danger:
a. Micrococci
b. Mold fungi
c. Sarcinae
*d. Hemolytic streptococci
e. Yeast fungi
1012. Air contamination with pathological microorganisms can be determined by the presence of indicator bacteria. Specify the bacteria that indicate immediate epidemiologic danger:
a. Mold fungi
b. Sarcinae
c. Micrococci
d. Yeast fungi
*e. Hemolytic streptococci
1013. Albinism can be characterized by disturbed metabolism of a certain amino acid. Name this amino acid.
*a. Phenylalanine
b. Methionine
c. Tryptophan
d. Glutamine
e. Histidine
1014. Albinism can be characterized by disturbed metabolism of a certain amino acid. Name this amino acid.
a. Methionine
b. Glutamine
c. Tryptophan
*d. Phenylalanine
e. Histidine
1015. Albinism can be characterized by disturbed metabolism of a certain amino acid. Name this amino acid.
a. Tryptophan
*b. Phenylalanine
c. Histidine
d. Methionine
e. Glutamine
1016. Aldehyde dehydrogenase inhibitors are widely used in the treatment of alcohol dependence. What metabolite causes the feeling of disgust towards alcohol, if its blood level is elevated?
*a. Acetaldehyde
b. Methanol
c. Cholesterol
d. Glucose
e. Fructose
1017. Aldehyde dehydrogenase inhibitors are widely used in the treatment of alcohol dependence. What metabolite causes the feeling of disgust towards alcohol, if its blood level is elevated?
a. Cholesterol
b. Fructose
c. Glucose
d. Methanol
*e. Acetaldehyde
1018. Aldehyde dehydrogenase inhibitors are widely used in the treatment of alcohol dependence. What metabolite causes the feeling of disgust towards alcohol, if its blood level is elevated?
a. Cholesterol
b. Methanol
*c. Acetaldehyde
d. Glucose
e. Fructose
1019. Alimentary hyperglycemia is observed after eating carbohydrate-rich foods. What hepatocyte enzyme activity is induced the most in this case?
a. Glucose-6-phosphatase
b. Aldolase
*c. Glucokinase
d. Isocitrate dehydrogenase
e. Phosphorylase
1020. Alimentary hyperglycemia is observed after eating carbohydrate-rich foods. What hepatocyte enzyme activity is induced the most in this case?
a. Glucose-6-phosphatase
b. Isocitrate dehydrogenase
c. Phosphorylase
d. Aldolase
*e. Glucokinase
1021. Alimentary hyperglycemia is observed after eating carbohydrate-rich foods. What hepatocyte enzyme activity is induced the most in this case?
a. Isocitrate dehydrogenase
b. Aldolase
*c. Glucokinase
d. Phosphorylase
e. Glucose-6-phosphatase
1022. Alkaline hydrolysis of esters (complex ethers) is called:
a. Condensation
b. Rearrangement
c. Etherification
d. Oxidation
*e. Saponification
1023. Alkaline hydrolysis of esters (complex ethers) is called:
a. Oxidation
*b. Saponification
c. Rearrangement
d. Condensation
e. Etherification
1024. Alkaline hydrolysis of esters (complex ethers) is called:
a. Rearrangement
b. Etherification
c. Condensation
*d. Saponification
e. Oxidation
1025. Alkaptonuria is caused by a hereditary disorder of the metabolism of a certain amino acid. Name this amino acid.
a. Arginine
*b. Tyrosine
c. Tryptophan
d. Alanine
e. Phenol
1026. Alkaptonuria is caused by a hereditary disorder of the metabolism of a certain amino acid. Name this amino acid.
a. Tryptophan
b. Alanine
*c. Tyrosine
d. Phenol
e. Arginine
1027. Alkaptonuria is caused by a hereditary disorder of the metabolism of a certain amino acid. Name this amino acid.
a. Tryptophan
b. Alanine
c. Arginine
d. Phenol
*e. Tyrosine
1028. Alkaptonuria is characterized by excessive urinary excretion of homogentisic acid. Development of this disease is associated with metabolism disorder of the following amino acid:
*a. Tyrosine
b. Alanine
c. Tryptophan
d. Asparagine
e. Methionine
1029. Alkaptonuria is characterized by excessive urinary excretion of homogentisic acid. Development of this disease is associated with metabolism disorder of the following amino acid:
a. Alanine
b. Methionine
c. Tryptophan
d. Asparagine
*e. Tyrosine
1030. Alkaptonuria is characterized by excessive urinary excretion of homogentisic acid. Development of this disease is associated with metabolism disorder of the following amino acid:
a. Tryptophan
b. Alanine
c. Asparagine
*d. Tyrosine
e. Methionine
1031. All strong electrolytes cause sol coagulation, if added to a sol in a sufficient amount. The coagulant ion in this case is a particle with the charge that is:
a. Identical to the charge of the colloidal  particle
b. Identical to potential-determining ions
c. Identical to the charge of the nucleus
d. Opposite to the counterions of the  adsorption layer
*e. Opposite to the charge of the colloidal  particle
1032. All strong electrolytes cause sol coagulation, if added to a sol in a sufficient amount. The coagulant ion in this case is a particle with the charge that is:
a. Identical to the charge of the nucleus
b. Opposite to the counterions of the  adsorption layer
*c. Opposite to the charge of the colloidal  particle
d. Identical to the charge of the colloidal  particle
e. Identical to potential-determining ions
1033. All strong electrolytes cause sol coagulation, if added to a sol in a sufficient amount. The coagulant ion in this case is a particle with the charge that is:
a. Opposite to the counterions of the  adsorption layer
b. Identical to the charge of the colloidal  particle
c. Identical to potential-determining ions
d. Identical to the charge of the nucleus
*e. Opposite to the charge of the colloidal  particle
1034. Allopurinol is used to reduce the formation of uric acid in the treatment of gout. What enzyme does this compound inhibit?
a. Arginase
*b. Xanthine oxidase
c. Lactate dehydrogenase
d. Catalase
e. Amylase
1035. Allopurinol is used to reduce the formation of uric acid in the treatment of gout. What enzyme does this compound inhibit?
a. Lactate dehydrogenase
*b. Xanthine oxidase
c. Arginase
d. Catalase
e. Amylase
1036. Allopurinol is used to reduce the formation of uric acid in the treatment of gout. What enzyme does this compound inhibit?
a. Lactate dehydrogenase
b. Catalase
*c. Xanthine oxidase
d. Amylase
e. Arginase
1037. Allopurinol is used to treat gout. What is the mechanism of action of this drug?
*a. Competitive inhibitor of xanthine oxidase
b. Xanthine oxidase activator
c. Xanthine oxidase coenzyme
d. Activator of purine nucleotide catabolism
e. Inhibitor of purine nucleotide synthesis
1038. Allopurinol is used to treat gout. What is the mechanism of action of this drug?
a. Inhibitor of purine nucleotide synthesis
b. Xanthine oxidase coenzyme
*c. Competitive inhibitor of xanthine oxidase
d. Activator of purine nucleotide catabolism
e. Xanthine oxidase activator
1039. Allopurinol is used to treat gout. What is the mechanism of action of this drug?
a. Xanthine oxidase activator
b. Xanthine oxidase coenzyme
c. Inhibitor of purine nucleotide synthesis
*d. Competitive inhibitor of xanthine oxidase
e. Activator of purine nucleotide catabolism
1040. Althaea officinalis root assumes a marked blue hue on section when processed with methylene blue, which indicates the presence of:
*a. Mucus
b. Glycogen
c. Lipids
d. Inulin
e. Starch
1041. Althaea officinalis root assumes a marked blue hue on section when processed with methylene blue, which indicates the presence of:
*a. Mucus
b. Glycogen
c. Lipids
d. Starch
e. Inulin
1042. Althaea officinalis root assumes a marked blue hue on section when processed with methylene blue, which indicates the presence of:
a. Lipids
*b. Mucus
c. Inulin
d. Glycogen
e. Starch
1043. Amino acids and their derivatives function as neurotransmitters in brain neurons. What neurotransmitter forms from an aromatic amino acid?
*a. Dopamine
b. Methionine
c. Glycine
d. Leucine
e. Taurine
1044. Amino acids and their derivatives function as neurotransmitters in brain neurons. What neurotransmitter forms from an aromatic amino acid?
a. Leucine
b. Glycine
c. Methionine
*d. Dopamine
e. Taurine
1045. Amino acids and their derivatives function as neurotransmitters in brain neurons. What neurotransmitter forms from an aromatic amino acid?
a. Leucine
b. Methionine
*c. Dopamine
d. Taurine
e. Glycine
1046. Amino acids can participate in a large number of metabolic processes. What amino acid functions as a donor of methyl groups (-СН_3)?
a. Isoleucine
b. Leucine
c. Valine
*d. Methionine
e. Tryptophan
1047. Amino acids can participate in a large number of metabolic processes. What amino acid functions as a donor of methyl groups (-СН_3)?
a. Leucine
b. Isoleucine
c. Tryptophan
d. Valine
*e. Methionine
1048. Amino acids can participate in a large number of metabolic processes. What amino acid functions as a donor of methyl groups (-СН_3)?
a. Valine
b. Leucine
c. Isoleucine
*d. Methionine
e. Tryptophan
1049. Amino acids take part in methylation reactions during the synthesis of a number of bioactive substances - adrenaline, melatonin, phosphatidylcholine, creatine. For the synthesis of these compounds, the active form of a certain amino acid is used. Name this amino acid.
a. Alanine
*b. Methionine
c. Valine
d. Phenylalanine
e. Threonine
1050. Amino acids take part in methylation reactions during the synthesis of a number of bioactive substances - adrenaline, melatonin, phosphatidylcholine, creatine. For the synthesis of these compounds, the active form of a certain amino acid is used. Name this amino acid.
a. Threonine
*b. Methionine
c. Phenylalanine
d. Valine
e. Alanine
1051. Amino acids take part in methylation reactions during the synthesis of a number of bioactive substances - adrenaline, melatonin, phosphatidylcholine, creatine. For the synthesis of these compounds, the active form of a certain amino acid is used. Name this amino acid.
a. Valine
b. Alanine
*c. Methionine
d. Phenylalanine
e. Threonine
1052. Ammonia is a highly toxic substance, especially for the nervous system. This toxic product binds with a certain metabolite of the tricarboxylic acid cycle, forming glutamate and glutamine. What metabolite is it?
a. Citrate
*b. Alpha-ketoglutarate
c. Malate
d. Fumarate
e. Succinate
1053. Ammonia is a highly toxic substance, especially for the nervous system. This toxic product binds with a certain metabolite of the tricarboxylic acid cycle, forming glutamate and glutamine. What metabolite is it?
a. Citrate
b. Fumarate
c. Succinate
*d. Alpha-ketoglutarate
e. Malate
1054. Ammonia is a highly toxic substance, especially for the nervous system. This toxic product binds with a certain metabolite of the tricarboxylic acid cycle, forming glutamate and glutamine. What metabolite is it?
a. Succinate
*b. Alpha-ketoglutarate
c. Malate
d. Fumarate
e. Citrate
1055. Ammonia is a toxic substance that is especially dangerous for the brain. In the human body, the main product of ammonia neutralization and excretion is urea. Name the process of urea synthesis.
a. Cori cycle
b. Linen cycle
c. Shemin-Rittenberg cycle
*d. Krebs ornithine cycle
e. Citric acid cycle
1056. Ammonia is a toxic substance that is especially dangerous for the brain. In the human body, the main product of ammonia neutralization and excretion is urea. Name the process of urea synthesis.
a. Shemin-Rittenberg cycle
b. Citric acid cycle
c. Cori cycle
*d. Krebs ornithine cycle
e. Linen cycle
1057. Ammonia is a toxic substance that is especially dangerous for the brain. In the human body, the main product of ammonia neutralization and excretion is urea. Name the process of urea synthesis.
a. Shemin-Rittenberg cycle
b. Cori cycle
*c. Krebs ornithine cycle
d. Citric acid cycle
e. Linen cycle
1058. Ammonium ions (NH_4^+) must be removed from a mixture during the detection of sodium (Na^+) and potassium (K^+) cations of the first analytical group. Why is it necessary?
*a. They interfere with the determination  of potassium and sodium ions
b. The solution pH becomes <7, because of hydrolysis of these ions
c. The solution pH becomes >7, because of hydrolysis of these ions
d. Compounds with K^+ and Na^+ ions  form supersaturated solutions
e. Ammonium salts decompose at high  temperatures
1059. Ammonium ions (NH_4^+) must be removed from a mixture during the detection of sodium (Na^+) and potassium (K^+) cations of the first analytical group. Why is it necessary?
a. Ammonium salts decompose at high  temperatures
b. Compounds with K^+ and Na^+ ions  form supersaturated solutions
*c. They interfere with the determination  of potassium and sodium ions
d. The solution pH becomes <7, because of hydrolysis of these ions
e. The solution pH becomes >7, because of hydrolysis of these ions
1060. Ammonium ions (NH_4^+) must be removed from a mixture during the detection of sodium (Na^+) and potassium (K^+) cations of the first analytical group. Why is it necessary?
a. Compounds with K^+ and Na^+ ions  form supersaturated solutions
b. Ammonium salts decompose at high  temperatures
*c. They interfere with the determination  of potassium and sodium ions
d. The solution pH becomes >7, because of hydrolysis of these ions
e. The solution pH becomes <7, because of hydrolysis of these ions
1061. Ammonium iron(III) sulfate can be used as an indicator in:
a. Acidimetry
b. Alkalimetry
c. Complexometric titration
*d. Argentometry, Volhard method
e. Argentometry, Mohr method
1062. Ammonium iron(III) sulfate can be used as an indicator in:
a. Acidimetry
b. Complexometric titration
c. Alkalimetry
*d. Argentometry, Volhard method
e. Argentometry, Mohr method
1063. Ammonium iron(III) sulfate can be used as an indicator in:
a. Complexometric titration
b. Acidimetry
c. Alkalimetry
*d. Argentometry, Volhard method
e. Argentometry, Mohr method
1064. Ammonium thiocyanate solution was added into the solution being studied. The resulting solution colored red. This analytical effect indicates the presence of the following cation:
*a. Iron(III)
b. Mercury(I)
c. Mercury(II)
d. Silver
e. Lead(II)
1065. Ammonium thiocyanate solution was added into the solution being studied. The resulting solution colored red. This analytical effect indicates the presence of the following cation:
a. Mercury(II)
b. Mercury(I)
c. Lead(II)
d. Silver
*e. Iron(III)
1066. Ammonium thiocyanate solution was added into the solution being studied. The resulting solution colored red. This analytical effect indicates the presence of the following cation:
a. Silver
b. Lead(II)
*c. Iron(III)
d. Mercury(II)
e. Mercury(I)
1067. Among NSAIDs, the least damaging effect on the gastrointestinal mucosa  is characteristic of:
*a. Celecoxib
b. Butadion (Phenylbutazone)
c. Acetylsalicylic acid
d. Diclofenac
e. Naproxen
1068. Among NSAIDs, the least damaging effect on the gastrointestinal mucosa  is characteristic of:
a. Acetylsalicylic acid
b. Diclofenac
c. Naproxen
*d. Celecoxib
e. Butadion (Phenylbutazone)
1069. Among NSAIDs, the least damaging effect on the gastrointestinal mucosa  is characteristic of:
a. Butadion (Phenylbutazone)
b. Naproxen
c. Diclofenac
d. Acetylsalicylic acid
*e. Celecoxib
1070. Among dosage forms there are numerous disperse systems. Select a free disperse system from the list:
*a. Emulsion
b. Diaphragm
c. Gel
d. Jelly
e. Membrane
1071. Among dosage forms there are numerous disperse systems. Select a free disperse system from the list:
a. Gel
b. Membrane
c. Jelly
*d. Emulsion
e. Diaphragm
1072. Among dosage forms there are numerous disperse systems. Select a free disperse system from the list:
a. Jelly
*b. Emulsion
c. Gel
d. Membrane
e. Diaphragm
1073. Amperometric titration is used in analysis of some pharmaceutical preparations. The amperometric titration method is based on the following:
a. Ion exchange between the analyte solution and cationite
b. Measuring the potential difference of the electrodes during the titration process
c. Ion exchange between the anionite and analyte solution
*d. Determining the equivalence point by a sharp change in the diffusion current during the titration process
e. Measuring the cell voltage during the titration
1074. Amperometric titration is used in analysis of some pharmaceutical preparations. The amperometric titration method is based on the following:
a. Measuring the cell voltage during the titration
b. Measuring the potential difference of the electrodes during the titration process
c. Ion exchange between the anionite and analyte solution
d. Ion exchange between the analyte solution and cationite
*e. Determining the equivalence point by a sharp change in the diffusion current during the titration process
1075. Amperometric titration is used in analysis of some pharmaceutical preparations. The amperometric titration method is based on the following:
a. Measuring the potential difference of the electrodes during the titration process
b. Ion exchange between the analyte solution and cationite
*c. Determining the equivalence point by a sharp change in the diffusion current during the titration process
d. Measuring the cell voltage during the titration
e. Ion exchange between the anionite and analyte solution
1076. An HIV-infected patient presents with suppression of the immune system activity. What cells are affected in this case, causing the state of immunodeficiency in the patient?
*a. Helper T cells
b. Suppressor T cells
c. Killer T cells
d. Macrophages
e. B lymphocytes
1077. An HIV-infected patient presents with suppression of the immune system activity. What cells are affected in this case, causing the state of immunodeficiency in the patient?
a. Killer T cells
b. B lymphocytes
*c. Helper T cells
d. Suppressor T cells
e. Macrophages
1078. An HIV-infected patient presents with suppression of the immune system activity. What cells are affected in this case, causing the state of immunodeficiency in the patient?
a. Suppressor T cells
b. Macrophages
c. B lymphocytes
d. Killer T cells
*e. Helper T cells
1079. An analytical chemist conducts a systematic analysis of a mixture of anions. What reagents are used in the test for oxidizing anions?
*a. KI in the presence of chloroform
b. HCl in the presence of amyl alcohol
c. Na_2C_2O_4
d. AgNO_3 in the presence of HNO_3
e. Ba(NO_3)_2
1080. An analytical chemist conducts a systematic analysis of a mixture of anions. What reagents are used in the test for oxidizing anions?
a. HCl in the presence of amyl alcohol
b. AgNO_3 in the presence of HNO_3
c. Na_2C_2O_4
d. Ba(NO_3)_2
*e. KI in the presence of chloroform
1081. An analytical chemist conducts a systematic analysis of a mixture of anions. What reagents are used in the test for oxidizing anions?
a. Na_2C_2O_4
*b. KI in the presence of chloroform
c. HCl in the presence of amyl alcohol
d. AgNO_3 in the presence of HNO_3
e. Ba(NO_3)_2
1082. An analytical chemist conducts qualitative analysis of IV group cations. What reagent can be used to determine zinc?
a. Alizarin
b. Murexide
c. Diphenylamine
d. Thiourea
*e. Dithizone
1083. An analytical chemist conducts qualitative analysis of IV group cations. What reagent can be used to determine zinc?
a. Diphenylamine
b. Murexide
*c. Dithizone
d. Thiourea
e. Alizarin
1084. An analytical chemist conducts qualitative analysis of IV group cations. What reagent can be used to determine zinc?
a. Diphenylamine
b. Murexide
c. Alizarin
d. Thiourea
*e. Dithizone
1085. An anxiolytic agent, a benzodiazepine derivative, was prescribed to a patient with a neurosis in order to reduce its signs. What medicine belongs to this group of drugs?
a. Atropine sulphate
b. Nandrolone
c. Piroxicam
d. Trihexyphenidyl
*e. Diazepam
1086. An anxiolytic agent, a benzodiazepine derivative, was prescribed to a patient with a neurosis in order to reduce its signs. What medicine belongs to this group of drugs?
a. Atropine sulphate
b. Trihexyphenidyl
*c. Diazepam
d. Piroxicam
e. Nandrolone
1087. An anxiolytic agent, a benzodiazepine derivative, was prescribed to a patient with a neurosis in order to reduce its signs. What medicine belongs to this group of drugs?
a. Nandrolone
b. Atropine sulphate
*c. Diazepam
d. Piroxicam
e. Trihexyphenidyl
1088. An athlete is recommended to take carnitine to improve his achievements. What process does carnitine activate?
*a. Fatty acids transport
b. Vitamin K transport
c. Glucose transport
d. Amino acids transport
e. Vitamin B_12 transport
1089. An athlete is recommended to take carnitine to improve his achievements. What process does carnitine activate?
a. Vitamin K transport
*b. Fatty acids transport
c. Vitamin B_12 transport
d. Glucose transport
e. Amino acids transport
1090. An autoimmune disorder of islet beta-cells was detected in a 14-year-old girl with hyperglycemia, glycosuria, and polyuria. What type of diabetes does this girl have?
a. Diabetes insipidus
b. -
*c. Type 1 diabetes mellitus
d. Gestational diabetes
e. Type 2 diabetes mellitus
1091. An autoimmune disorder of islet beta-cells was detected in a 14-year-old girl with hyperglycemia, glycosuria, and polyuria. What type of diabetes does this girl have?
a. Type 2 diabetes mellitus
b. Diabetes insipidus
c. -
*d. Type 1 diabetes mellitus
e. Gestational diabetes
1092. An autoimmune disorder of islet beta-cells was detected in a 14-year-old girl with hyperglycemia, glycosuria, and polyuria. What type of diabetes does this girl have?
a. Type 2 diabetes mellitus
b. Gestational diabetes
*c. Type 1 diabetes mellitus
d. Diabetes insipidus
e. -
1093. An elderly patient has developed postoperative intestinal atony. What anticholinesterase drug should be prescribed?
*a. Proserin
b. Atropine sulfate
c. Dithylinum (Suxamethonium chloride)
d. Metoprolol
e. Pilocarpine hydrochloride
1094. An elderly patient has developed postoperative intestinal atony. What anticholinesterase drug should be prescribed?
a. Atropine sulfate
*b. Proserin
c. Metoprolol
d. Pilocarpine hydrochloride
e. Dithylinum (Suxamethonium chloride)
1095. An elderly patient has developed postoperative intestinal atony. What anticholinesterase drug should be prescribed?
a. Pilocarpine hydrochloride
b. Metoprolol
c. Atropine sulfate
*d. Proserin
e. Dithylinum (Suxamethonium chloride)
1096. An elderly patient suffers from constipation caused by colon hypotonia. What drug should be prescribed?
*a. Bisacodyl
b. Castor oil
c. Novocainamide (Procainamide)
d. Atropine sulfate
e. Sodium sulfate
1097. An elderly patient suffers from constipation caused by colon hypotonia. What drug should be prescribed?
a. Novocainamide (Procainamide)
*b. Bisacodyl
c. Atropine sulfate
d. Castor oil
e. Sodium sulfate
1098. An elderly patient suffers from constipation caused by colon hypotonia. What drug should be prescribed?
a. Novocainamide (Procainamide)
b. Atropine sulfate
c. Sodium sulfate
*d. Bisacodyl
e. Castor oil
1099. An engine driver complains of his seasonal allergy symptoms. What non-sedating drug should be prescribed in this case?
a. Analgine (Metamizole)
b. Novocaine
*c. Loratadine
d. Atenolol
e. Fenofibrate
1100. An engine driver complains of his seasonal allergy symptoms. What non-sedating drug should be prescribed in this case?
a. Atenolol
b. Analgine (Metamizole)
*c. Loratadine
d. Fenofibrate
e. Novocaine
1101. An engine driver complains of his seasonal allergy symptoms. What non-sedating drug should be prescribed in this case?
a. Fenofibrate
b. Analgine (Metamizole)
*c. Loratadine
d. Atenolol
e. Novocaine
1102. An enzyme transports structure fragments from one substrate into another. Name this class of enzymes:
*a. Transferases
b. Oxidoreductases
c. Isomerases
d. Hydrolases
e. Ligases
1103. An enzyme transports structure fragments from one substrate into another. Name this class of enzymes:
a. Hydrolases
b. Ligases
c. Isomerases
d. Oxidoreductases
*e. Transferases
1104. An enzyme transports structure fragments from one substrate into another. Name this class of enzymes:
a. Oxidoreductases
b. Hydrolases
c. Isomerases
d. Ligases
*e. Transferases
1105. An injured person exhibits the following signs at the site of trauma: skin redness, throbbing small arteries, elevated local temperature, increased tissue turgor. What local blood circulation disorder are these presentations typical of?
*a. Arterial hyperemia
b. Ischemia
c. Venous hyperemia
d. Embolism
e. Thrombosis
1106. An injured person exhibits the following signs at the site of trauma: skin redness, throbbing small arteries, elevated local temperature, increased tissue turgor. What local blood circulation disorder are these presentations typical of?
a. Ischemia
b. Embolism
c. Thrombosis
*d. Arterial hyperemia
e. Venous hyperemia
1107. An injured person exhibits the following signs at the site of trauma: skin redness, throbbing small arteries, elevated local temperature, increased tissue turgor. What local blood circulation disorder are these presentations typical of?
a. Venous hyperemia
*b. Arterial hyperemia
c. Ischemia
d. Thrombosis
e. Embolism
1108. An iodine solution was prepared using the method of established titer. What primary standards can be used for the standardization in this case?
a. Ammonium oxalate and oxalic acid
b. Potassium dichromate and potassium bromate
c. Metallic iron and iron(II) sulfate
d. Sodium tetraborate and sodium carbonate
*e. Hydrazine sulfate and arsenic(III) oxide
1109. An iodine solution was prepared using the method of established titer. What primary standards can be used for the standardization in this case?
a. Metallic iron and iron(II) sulfate
b. Potassium dichromate and potassium bromate
c. Ammonium oxalate and oxalic acid
*d. Hydrazine sulfate and arsenic(III) oxide
e. Sodium tetraborate and sodium carbonate
1110. An iodine solution was prepared using the method of established titer. What primary standards can be used for the standardization in this case?
a. Metallic iron and iron(II) sulfate
b. Sodium tetraborate and sodium carbonate
c. Ammonium oxalate and oxalic acid
d. Potassium dichromate and potassium bromate
*e. Hydrazine sulfate and arsenic(III) oxide
1111. An older patient exhibits low levels of red blood cells and hemoglobin in blood, but the color index is 1,3. Blood smear analysis revealed megaloblasts. What type of anemia is observed in this case?
a. Acquired hemolytic
b. Iron-deficiency
*c. B_12-folic acid deficiency
d. Hereditary hemolytic
e. Chronic posthemorrhagic
1112. An older patient exhibits low levels of red blood cells and hemoglobin in blood, but the color index is 1,3. Blood smear analysis revealed megaloblasts. What type of anemia is observed in this case?
a. Chronic posthemorrhagic
b. Acquired hemolytic
c. Iron-deficiency
d. Hereditary hemolytic
*e. B_12-folic acid deficiency
1113. An older patient exhibits low levels of red blood cells and hemoglobin in blood, but the color index is 1,3. Blood smear analysis revealed megaloblasts. What type of anemia is observed in this case?
a. Iron-deficiency
b. Acquired hemolytic
c. Chronic posthemorrhagic
d. Hereditary hemolytic
*e. B_12-folic acid deficiency
1114. An oncological patient was prescribed fluorouracil that is a competitive inhibitor of thymidine synthase. It inhibits the process of:
*a. Pyrimidine nucleotides synthesis
b. Purine nucleotides synthesis
c. Carbohydrate disintegration
d. Lipids synthesis
e. Purine nucleotides disintegration
1115. An oncological patient was prescribed fluorouracil that is a competitive inhibitor of thymidine synthase. It inhibits the process of:
a. Carbohydrate disintegration
b. Purine nucleotides synthesis
c. Purine nucleotides disintegration
*d. Pyrimidine nucleotides synthesis
e. Lipids synthesis
1116. An oncological patient was prescribed fluorouracil that is a competitive inhibitor of thymidine synthase. It inhibits the process of:
a. Purine nucleotides disintegration
b. Lipids synthesis
c. Purine nucleotides synthesis
d. Carbohydrate disintegration
*e. Pyrimidine nucleotides synthesis
1117. An outbreak of acute intestinal infection occurred in a kindergarten. An epidemiological laboratory team has conducted an examination of hand lavage of kitchen workers. What microorganisms in the hand lavage can indicate a fecal contamination?
a. Actinomycetes
b. S. aureus
*c. E) coli
d. Streptomycetes
e. C) albicans
1118. An outbreak of acute intestinal infection occurred in a kindergarten. An epidemiological laboratory team has conducted an examination of hand lavage of kitchen workers. What microorganisms in the hand lavage can indicate a fecal contamination?
a. C) albicans
*b. E) coli
c. Actinomycetes
d. S. aureus
e. Streptomycetes
1119. An outbreak of acute intestinal infection occurred in a kindergarten. An epidemiological laboratory team has conducted an examination of hand lavage of kitchen workers. What microorganisms in the hand lavage can indicate a fecal contamination?
a. C) albicans
*b. E) coli
c. Actinomycetes
d. Streptomycetes
e. S. aureus
1120. Analysis of a sedative herbal tea detects yellow-green infructescences (microstrobiles) formed by bract scales with a tile-like arrangement and small nut-like fruits. What plant can be characterized by such features?
*a. Humulus lupulus
b. Juniperus communis
c. Ephedra distachya
d. Alnus glutinosа
e. Schizandra chinensis
1121. Analysis of a sedative herbal tea detects yellow-green infructescences (microstrobiles) formed by bract scales with a tile-like arrangement and small nut-like fruits. What plant can be characterized by such features?
a. Alnus glutinosа
*b. Humulus lupulus
c. Ephedra distachya
d. Juniperus communis
e. Schizandra chinensis
1122. Analysis of a sedative herbal tea detects yellow-green infructescences (microstrobiles) formed by bract scales with a tile-like arrangement and small nut-like fruits. What plant can be characterized by such features?
a. Ephedra distachya
b. Juniperus communis
c. Schizandra chinensis
*d. Humulus lupulus
e. Alnus glutinosа
1123. Androecium of Brassica oleracea flower has six stamens, with four stamens of inner circle longer than two stamens of outer circle. What is this type of androecium called?
*a. Tetradynamous
b. Polydelphous
c. Didynamous
d. Diadelphous
e. Monadelphous
1124. Androecium of Brassica oleracea flower has six stamens, with four stamens of inner circle longer than two stamens of outer circle. What is this type of androecium called?
a. Didynamous
b. Diadelphous
c. Polydelphous
d. Monadelphous
*e. Tetradynamous
1125. Androecium of Brassica oleracea flower has six stamens, with four stamens of inner circle longer than two stamens of outer circle. What is this type of androecium called?
a. Didynamous
b. Monadelphous
c. Diadelphous
*d. Tetradynamous
e. Polydelphous
1126. Anionites are the adsorbents that can:
a. Adsorb ions from the medium
*b. Replace their own anions with anions of the medium
c. Replace their own ions with molecules of the medium
d. Replace their own cations with cations of the medium
e. Adsorb molecules from the medium
1127. Anionites are the adsorbents that can:
a. Replace their own ions with molecules of the medium
*b. Replace their own anions with anions of the medium
c. Replace their own cations with cations of the medium
d. Adsorb ions from the medium
e. Adsorb molecules from the medium
1128. Anionites are the adsorbents that can:
a. Replace their own ions with molecules of the medium
b. Adsorb ions from the medium
*c. Replace their own anions with anions of the medium
d. Adsorb molecules from the medium
e. Replace their own cations with cations of the medium
1129. Anticholinesterase agents have an effect on neuromuscular transmission and on the tone and motility of the gastrointestinal tract and urinary bladder. What drug is a synthetic representative of this group of drugs?
a. Dipyroxime (Trimedoxime bromide)
b. Physostigmine salicylate
c. Isonitrozine
*d. Prozerin (Neostigmine)
e. Galantamine hydrobromide
1130. Anticholinesterase agents have an effect on neuromuscular transmission and on the tone and motility of the gastrointestinal tract and urinary bladder. What drug is a synthetic representative of this group of drugs?
a. Galantamine hydrobromide
b. Physostigmine salicylate
*c. Prozerin (Neostigmine)
d. Dipyroxime (Trimedoxime bromide)
e. Isonitrozine
1131. Anticholinesterase agents have an effect on neuromuscular transmission and on the tone and motility of the gastrointestinal tract and urinary bladder. What drug is a synthetic representative of this group of drugs?
a. Isonitrozine
b. Dipyroxime (Trimedoxime bromide)
*c. Prozerin (Neostigmine)
d. Physostigmine salicylate
e. Galantamine hydrobromide
1132. Antidepressants can increase the content of catecholamines in the synaptic cleft. What is the mechanism of action of these drugs?
a. Activate decarboxylase
b. Inhibit aminotransferase
c. Activate aminotransferase
*d. Inhibit monoamine oxidase
e. Inhibit xanthine oxidase
1133. Antidepressants can increase the content of catecholamines in the synaptic cleft. What is the mechanism of action of these drugs?
a. Activate decarboxylase
b. Inhibit xanthine oxidase
c. Activate aminotransferase
d. Inhibit aminotransferase
*e. Inhibit monoamine oxidase
1134. Antidepressants can increase the content of catecholamines in the synaptic cleft. What is the mechanism of action of these drugs?
a. Inhibit xanthine oxidase
b. Activate aminotransferase
c. Activate decarboxylase
*d. Inhibit monoamine oxidase
e. Inhibit aminotransferase
1135. Antiparkinsonian drugs are classified based on the mechanism of their action in the body. What drug is a dopamine precursor?
a. Bromocriptine
b. Midantan (Amantadine)
c. Selegiline
d. Cyclodol (Trihexyphenidyl)
*e. Levodopa
1136. Antiparkinsonian drugs are classified based on the mechanism of their action in the body. What drug is a dopamine precursor?
a. Cyclodol (Trihexyphenidyl)
b. Midantan (Amantadine)
*c. Levodopa
d. Selegiline
e. Bromocriptine
1137. Antiparkinsonian drugs are classified based on the mechanism of their action in the body. What drug is a dopamine precursor?
a. Cyclodol (Trihexyphenidyl)
b. Selegiline
c. Bromocriptine
*d. Levodopa
e. Midantan (Amantadine)
1138. Any damage to the patient's vessels results in persistent hemorrhage. Blood clotting factor VIII is deficient in the patient's blood. What disease does this patient suffer from?
*a. Hemophilia
b. Acute vascular purpura
c. Thrombocytopenic purpura
d. Anemia
e. Radiation sickness
1139. Any damage to the patient's vessels results in persistent hemorrhage. Blood clotting factor VIII is deficient in the patient's blood. What disease does this patient suffer from?
a. Anemia
*b. Hemophilia
c. Thrombocytopenic purpura
d. Radiation sickness
e. Acute vascular purpura
1140. Any damage to the patient's vessels results in persistent hemorrhage. Blood clotting factor VIII is deficient in the patient's blood. What disease does this patient suffer from?
a. Anemia
b. Thrombocytopenic purpura
c. Acute vascular purpura
*d. Hemophilia
e. Radiation sickness
1141. As a result of a car accident, a man (driver) has suffered an extensive blood loss. He presents with rapid breathing, tachycardia, and low blood pressure. What pathological condition is likely to be observed in him one hour after the blood loss?
*a. Hypovolemia
b. Erythrocyte hypochromia
c. Erythrocyte hyperchromia
d. Dyslipidemia
e. Hyperglycemia
1142. As a result of a car accident, a man (driver) has suffered an extensive blood loss. He presents with rapid breathing, tachycardia, and low blood pressure. What pathological condition is likely to be observed in him one hour after the blood loss?
a. Dyslipidemia
b. Erythrocyte hyperchromia
c. Erythrocyte hypochromia
*d. Hypovolemia
e. Hyperglycemia
1143. As a result of a car accident, a man (driver) has suffered an extensive blood loss. He presents with rapid breathing, tachycardia, and low blood pressure. What pathological condition is likely to be observed in him one hour after the blood loss?
a. Erythrocyte hyperchromia
*b. Hypovolemia
c. Dyslipidemia
d. Hyperglycemia
e. Erythrocyte hypochromia
1144. As a result of an accident (snakebite) a male patient has the following blood values: Hb- 80 g/l, RBC- 3,0cdot10^12/l; WBC- 5,5cdot10^9/l. What type of anemia is observed in this case?
*a. Hemolytic
b. Folic acid-deficiency
c. Iron-deficiency
d. Posthemorrhagic
e. Aplastic
1145. As a result of an accident (snakebite) a male patient has the following blood values: Hb- 80 g/l, RBC- 3,0cdot10^12/l; WBC- 5,5cdot10^9/l. What type of anemia is observed in this case?
*a. Hemolytic
b. Posthemorrhagic
c. Folic acid-deficiency
d. Iron-deficiency
e. Aplastic
1146. As a result of an accident (snakebite) a male patient has the following blood values: Hb- 80 g/l, RBC- 3,0cdot10^12/l; WBC- 5,5cdot10^9/l. What type of anemia is observed in this case?
a. Posthemorrhagic
*b. Hemolytic
c. Aplastic
d. Iron-deficiency
e. Folic acid-deficiency
1147. As a result of prolonged starvation, intracellular lipolysis activates in the tissues. What hormone is the activator of this process?
a. Cholecalciferol
b. Calcitonin
*c. Glucagon
d. Oxytocin
e. Insulin
1148. As a result of prolonged starvation, intracellular lipolysis activates in the tissues. What hormone is the activator of this process?
a. Cholecalciferol
b. Oxytocin
c. Insulin
d. Calcitonin
*e. Glucagon
1149. As a result of prolonged starvation, intracellular lipolysis activates in the tissues. What hormone is the activator of this process?
a. Oxytocin
b. Cholecalciferol
c. Calcitonin
d. Insulin
*e. Glucagon
1150. Asepsis, antiseptics, disinfection, and sterilization are widely used in pharmaceutical practice. What is the correct definition of the term "asepsis"?
*a. Preventing microbes from contaminating any object
b. Destruction of pathogenic microbes in the environment
c. The use of substances that kill microorganisms on the skin and mucosa
d. The use of substances that kill pathogenic microbes in the internal environment of the body
e. Complete destruction of all forms of microbes in an object
1151. Asepsis, antiseptics, disinfection, and sterilization are widely used in pharmaceutical practice. What is the correct definition of the term "asepsis"?
a. Complete destruction of all forms of microbes in an object
b. The use of substances that kill microorganisms on the skin and mucosa
c. The use of substances that kill pathogenic microbes in the internal environment of the body
d. Destruction of pathogenic microbes in the environment
*e. Preventing microbes from contaminating any object
1152. Asepsis, antiseptics, disinfection, and sterilization are widely used in pharmaceutical practice. What is the correct definition of the term "asepsis"?
a. Destruction of pathogenic microbes in the environment
*b. Preventing microbes from contaminating any object
c. The use of substances that kill microorganisms on the skin and mucosa
d. The use of substances that kill pathogenic microbes in the internal environment of the body
e. Complete destruction of all forms of microbes in an object
1153. At an altitude of 20000 meters, a depressurization of a cargo plane occurred, followed by its crashing to the ground. A forensic examination determined that the people onboard had died before the impact with the ground. Embolism was stated as one of the causes of death of the entire crew. What type of embolism is most likely in this case?
a. Air embolism
b. Thromboembolism
*c. Gas embolism
d. Foreign body embolism
e. Fat embolism
1154. At an altitude of 20000 meters, a depressurization of a cargo plane occurred, followed by its crashing to the ground. A forensic examination determined that the people onboard had died before the impact with the ground. Embolism was stated as one of the causes of death of the entire crew. What type of embolism is most likely in this case?
a. Foreign body embolism
*b. Gas embolism
c. Fat embolism
d. Air embolism
e. Thromboembolism
1155. At an altitude of 20000 meters, a depressurization of a cargo plane occurred, followed by its crashing to the ground. A forensic examination determined that the people onboard had died before the impact with the ground. Embolism was stated as one of the causes of death of the entire crew. What type of embolism is most likely in this case?
a. Foreign body embolism
b. Fat embolism
c. Thromboembolism
*d. Gas embolism
e. Air embolism
1156. At the beginning of the bacteriological study, microscopy of the studied material was carried out and Gram-positive cocci were detected in it. The cocci were arranged in the clusters that resembled a bunch of grapes. Next, the material was inoculated on a dense nutrient medium. Why was it done?
a. To obtain the pure culture
b. To study the biochemical properties
c. To study the cultural properties
d. To study the antigenic properties
*e. To obtain isolated colonies
1157. At the beginning of the bacteriological study, microscopy of the studied material was carried out and Gram-positive cocci were detected in it. The cocci were arranged in the clusters that resembled a bunch of grapes. Next, the material was inoculated on a dense nutrient medium. Why was it done?
a. To study the antigenic properties
b. To obtain the pure culture
c. To study the biochemical properties
*d. To obtain isolated colonies
e. To study the cultural properties
1158. At the beginning of the bacteriological study, microscopy of the studied material was carried out and Gram-positive cocci were detected in it. The cocci were arranged in the clusters that resembled a bunch of grapes. Next, the material was inoculated on a dense nutrient medium. Why was it done?
a. To study the biochemical properties
*b. To obtain isolated colonies
c. To study the antigenic properties
d. To study the cultural properties
e. To obtain the pure culture
1159. At what temperature should the determination be carried out in refractometric method of analysis?
a. 18^oC
b. 28^oC
c. 23^oC
*d. 20^oC
e. 25^oC
1160. At what temperature should the determination be carried out in refractometric method of analysis?
a. 25^oC
b. 28^oC
c. 23^oC
d. 18^oC
*e. 20^oC
1161. At what temperature should the determination be carried out in refractometric method of analysis?
a. 28^oC
b. 25^oC
c. 23^oC
*d. 20^oC
e. 18^oC
1162. Atropine sulfate belongs to the following group of drugs:
a. Nicotinic antagonists
b. Tranquilizers
*c. Muscarinic antagonists
d. alpha-adrenergic agonists
e. beta-adrenergic agonists
1163. Atropine sulfate belongs to the following group of drugs:
a. Nicotinic antagonists
b. beta-adrenergic agonists
c. Tranquilizers
*d. Muscarinic antagonists
e. alpha-adrenergic agonists
1164. Atropine sulfate belongs to the following group of drugs:
a. beta-adrenergic agonists
b. Nicotinic antagonists
c. alpha-adrenergic agonists
d. Tranquilizers
*e. Muscarinic antagonists
1165. Autopsy of a lab rat that for the period of 24 hours remained in an immobilization chamber revealed gastric erosions. What hormones can cause erosions in this case?
a. Estrogens
b. Glucagon
*c. Glucocorticoids
d. Mineralocorticoids
e. Insulin
1166. Autopsy of a lab rat that for the period of 24 hours remained in an immobilization chamber revealed gastric erosions. What hormones can cause erosions in this case?
a. Mineralocorticoids
b. Estrogens
c. Insulin
d. Glucagon
*e. Glucocorticoids
1167. Autopsy of a lab rat that for the period of 24 hours remained in an immobilization chamber revealed gastric erosions. What hormones can cause erosions in this case?
a. Mineralocorticoids
b. Glucagon
c. Insulin
d. Estrogens
*e. Glucocorticoids
1168. Azo dyes are produced as the result of:
a. Amination
b. Nitration
c. Nitrosation
*d. Azo coupling
e. Diazotization
1169. Azo dyes are produced as the result of:
a. Diazotization
b. Amination
*c. Azo coupling
d. Nitrosation
e. Nitration
1170. Azo dyes are produced as the result of:
a. Nitration
b. Amination
*c. Azo coupling
d. Nitrosation
e. Diazotization
1171. Bacteria eventually become resistant to antibacterial agents. What enables gram-positive bacteria's resistance to penicillin antibiotics?
*a. Beta-lactamases production
b. Cell wall permeability
c. Protein synthesis
d. Active transport of antibiotics
e. Active synthesis of peptidoglycane
1172. Bacteria eventually become resistant to antibacterial agents. What enables gram-positive bacteria's resistance to penicillin antibiotics?
a. Active synthesis of peptidoglycane
b. Active transport of antibiotics
c. Cell wall permeability
d. Protein synthesis
*e. Beta-lactamases production
1173. Bacteria eventually become resistant to antibacterial agents. What enables gram-positive bacteria's resistance to penicillin antibiotics?
a. Active transport of antibiotics
b. Cell wall permeability
c. Active synthesis of peptidoglycane
*d. Beta-lactamases production
e. Protein synthesis
1174. Bacterial enzymes typically exhibit a high specificity of their action. In practice, this feature of bacterial enzymes is used  for:
*a. Bacteria identification
b. Bacteria phage typing
c. Bacteria serotyping
d. Immunoglobulin production
e. Bacteria cultivation
1175. Bacterial enzymes typically exhibit a high specificity of their action. In practice, this feature of bacterial enzymes is used  for:
a. Bacteria cultivation
b. Bacteria serotyping
c. Immunoglobulin production
*d. Bacteria identification
e. Bacteria phage typing
1176. Bacterial enzymes typically exhibit a high specificity of their action. In practice, this feature of bacterial enzymes is used  for:
a. Bacteria phage typing
*b. Bacteria identification
c. Immunoglobulin production
d. Bacteria cultivation
e. Bacteria serotyping
1177. Bactericidal drug rivanol contains the following heterocyclic structure:
*a. Acridine
b. Anthracene
c. Quinoline
d. Isoquinoline
e. Phenanthrene
1178. Bactericidal drug rivanol contains the following heterocyclic structure:
a. Isoquinoline
b. Anthracene
c. Quinoline
*d. Acridine
e. Phenanthrene
1179. Bactericidal drug rivanol contains the following heterocyclic structure:
a. Quinoline
b. Anthracene
c. Phenanthrene
d. Isoquinoline
*e. Acridine
1180. Bacteriological analysis was conducted to assess the quality of the water used for pharmaceutical purposes. What value indicates the number of coliform bacteria in 1 liter of water?
*a. Coli index
b. Perfringens titer
c. Coliphage titer
d. Microbial number
e. Enterococcus titer
1181. Bacteriological analysis was conducted to assess the quality of the water used for pharmaceutical purposes. What value indicates the number of coliform bacteria in 1 liter of water?
a. Coliphage titer
*b. Coli index
c. Microbial number
d. Perfringens titer
e. Enterococcus titer
1182. Bacteriological analysis was conducted to assess the quality of the water used for pharmaceutical purposes. What value indicates the number of coliform bacteria in 1 liter of water?
a. Enterococcus titer
b. Perfringens titer
c. Coliphage titer
*d. Coli index
e. Microbial number
1183. Bacteriology of the feces of a patient with an acute intestinal infection allowed isolating a culture of Shigella sonnei. What serological reaction was used to identify the isolated culture?
*a. Agglutination
b. Bacteriolysis
c. Neutralization
d. Precipitation
e. Complement binding
1184. Bacteriology of the feces of a patient with an acute intestinal infection allowed isolating a culture of Shigella sonnei. What serological reaction was used to identify the isolated culture?
*a. Agglutination
b. Neutralization
c. Precipitation
d. Complement binding
e. Bacteriolysis
1185. Bacteriology of the feces of a patient with an acute intestinal infection allowed isolating a culture of Shigella sonnei. What serological reaction was used to identify the isolated culture?
a. Complement binding
b. Bacteriolysis
*c. Agglutination
d. Neutralization
e. Precipitation
1186. Bacterioscopic examination of chancre material revealed some mobile, long, convoluted microorganisms with 8-12 regular coils. These features are typical for:
a. Borrellia
b. Campylobacter
c. Vibrios
d. Leptospira
*e. Treponema
1187. Bacterioscopic examination of chancre material revealed some mobile, long, convoluted microorganisms with 8-12 regular coils. These features are typical for:
a. Campylobacter
b. Borrellia
c. Vibrios
d. Leptospira
*e. Treponema
1188. Bacterioscopic examination of chancre material revealed some mobile, long, convoluted microorganisms with 8-12 regular coils. These features are typical for:
a. Leptospira
b. Borrellia
*c. Treponema
d. Campylobacter
e. Vibrios
1189. Bacterioscopy of smears stained according to the Romanowsky-Giemsa technique revealed violet cocci-like microorganisms in the cytoplasm of epithelial cells. What pathogen can be characterized by its intracellular location?
a. Salmonella
b. Staphylococci
c. Streptococci
d. Shigella
*e. Chlamydia
1190. Bacterioscopy of smears stained according to the Romanowsky-Giemsa technique revealed violet cocci-like microorganisms in the cytoplasm of epithelial cells. What pathogen can be characterized by its intracellular location?
a. Shigella
b. Staphylococci
*c. Chlamydia
d. Salmonella
e. Streptococci
1191. Bacterioscopy of smears stained according to the Romanowsky-Giemsa technique revealed violet cocci-like microorganisms in the cytoplasm of epithelial cells. What pathogen can be characterized by its intracellular location?
a. Staphylococci
b. Shigella
c. Salmonella
*d. Chlamydia
e. Streptococci
1192. Bacterioscopy of the smears prepared from urethral discharge detects there gram-positive intracellular diplococci. What microorganisms were detected in the material?
*a. Gonococci
b. Staphylococci
c. Meningococci
d. Peptostreptococci
e. Streptococci
1193. Bacterioscopy of the smears prepared from urethral discharge detects there gram-positive intracellular diplococci. What microorganisms were detected in the material?
*a. Gonococci
b. Streptococci
c. Peptostreptococci
d. Meningococci
e. Staphylococci
1194. Bacterioscopy of the smears prepared from urethral discharge detects there gram-positive intracellular diplococci. What microorganisms were detected in the material?
a. Staphylococci
b. Meningococci
c. Streptococci
d. Peptostreptococci
*e. Gonococci
1195. Because of its antiplatelet effect, acetylsalicylic acid is used in the treatment of diseases of the cardiovascular system. What mechanism is this effect based on?
a. Inhibition of COX-2 enzyme activity
b. Inhibition of COX-1 enzyme activity
c. Stimulation of synthesis of E1 prostaglandins
*d. Inhibition of thromboxane A2 biosynthesis
e. Reduction of synthesis of E2 prostaglandins
1196. Because of its antiplatelet effect, acetylsalicylic acid is used in the treatment of diseases of the cardiovascular system. What mechanism is this effect based on?
a. Inhibition of COX-2 enzyme activity
b. Stimulation of synthesis of E1 prostaglandins
c. Reduction of synthesis of E2 prostaglandins
*d. Inhibition of thromboxane A2 biosynthesis
e. Inhibition of COX-1 enzyme activity
1197. Because of its antiplatelet effect, acetylsalicylic acid is used in the treatment of diseases of the cardiovascular system. What mechanism is this effect based on?
a. Stimulation of synthesis of E1 prostaglandins
b. Inhibition of COX-2 enzyme activity
c. Inhibition of COX-1 enzyme activity
d. Reduction of synthesis of E2 prostaglandins
*e. Inhibition of thromboxane A2 biosynthesis
1198. Because of suberization, the cell membranes do not become moistened with water, are impermeable to water and gases, and are resistant to decay. What tissue can contain suberized cells?
*a. Periderm
b. Cambium
c. Epidermis
d. Phloem
e. Phelloderm
1199. Because of suberization, the cell membranes do not become moistened with water, are impermeable to water and gases, and are resistant to decay. What tissue can contain suberized cells?
*a. Periderm
b. Cambium
c. Phelloderm
d. Epidermis
e. Phloem
1200. Because of suberization, the cell membranes do not become moistened with water, are impermeable to water and gases, and are resistant to decay. What tissue can contain suberized cells?
a. Epidermis
b. Phloem
*c. Periderm
d. Cambium
e. Phelloderm
1201. Bioavailability of a powder depends on the degree of comminution of the substance. The following value must be measured:
a. Concentration
*b. Dispersion
c. Particle mass
d. Particle volume
e. Solution density
1202. Bioavailability of a powder depends on the degree of comminution of the substance. The following value must be measured:
a. Particle volume
b. Solution density
c. Particle mass
d. Concentration
*e. Dispersion
1203. Bioavailability of a powder depends on the degree of comminution of the substance. The following value must be measured:
a. Solution density
b. Particle mass
*c. Dispersion
d. Particle volume
e. Concentration
1204. Biological fluids (sera, enzyme and vitamine solutions, etc.) are vulnerable to high temperatures, which is why they are sterilized under the temperature of 56--58^oС. They are heated 5--6 times, with 24-hour-long intervals between them. What sterilization method is it?
*a. Tyndallization
b. Autoclaving
c. Flaming
d. Pasteurization
e. Moist heat sterilization
1205. Biological fluids (sera, enzyme and vitamine solutions, etc.) are vulnerable to high temperatures, which is why they are sterilized under the temperature of 56--58^oС. They are heated 5--6 times, with 24-hour-long intervals between them. What sterilization method is it?
a. Flaming
b. Pasteurization
c. Moist heat sterilization
*d. Tyndallization
e. Autoclaving
1206. Biological fluids (sera, enzyme and vitamine solutions, etc.) are vulnerable to high temperatures, which is why they are sterilized under the temperature of 56--58^oС. They are heated 5--6 times, with 24-hour-long intervals between them. What sterilization method is it?
a. Pasteurization
*b. Tyndallization
c. Moist heat sterilization
d. Flaming
e. Autoclaving
1207. Biopotentials caused by various physiological processes are the result of the following forming at the phase interface:
*a. Electrical double layer
b. Adhesive layer
c. Diffuse layer
d. -
e. Absorption layer
1208. Biopotentials caused by various physiological processes are the result of the following forming at the phase interface:
a. Absorption layer
b. -
c. Diffuse layer
*d. Electrical double layer
e. Adhesive layer
1209. Biopotentials caused by various physiological processes are the result of the following forming at the phase interface:
a. Diffuse layer
b. Absorption layer
c. -
*d. Electrical double layer
e. Adhesive layer
1210. Blood contains erythrocytes with sizes of 10^-6 m degree as its constituent parts. What type of disperse system is blood?
a. Heterogeneous
*b. Microheterogeneous
c. Colloidal dispersion
d. Homogeneous
e. Coarse dispersion
1211. Blood contains erythrocytes with sizes of 10^-6 m degree as its constituent parts. What type of disperse system is blood?
a. Heterogeneous
b. Colloidal dispersion
c. Coarse dispersion
d. Homogeneous
*e. Microheterogeneous
1212. Blood contains erythrocytes with sizes of 10^-6 m degree as its constituent parts. What type of disperse system is blood?
a. Homogeneous
b. Colloidal dispersion
c. Coarse dispersion
d. Heterogeneous
*e. Microheterogeneous
1213. Blood test is as follows: erythrocytes - 1,5cdot 10^12/l; hemoglobin - 60 g/l; blood color index - 1,4; leukocytes - 3,0cdot 10^9/l, thrombocytes - 1,2cdot 10^10/l, reticulocytes - 0,2%. Blood smear revealed Jolly bodies, Cabot rings, megalocytes. What type of anemia does the patient have?
*a. B_12 and folic acid deficiency anemia
b. Iron deficiency anemia
c. Iron refractory anemia
d. Hemolytic anemia
e. Hypoplastic anemia
1214. Blood test is as follows: erythrocytes - 1,5cdot 10^12/l; hemoglobin - 60 g/l; blood color index - 1,4; leukocytes - 3,0cdot 10^9/l, thrombocytes - 1,2cdot 10^10/l, reticulocytes - 0,2%. Blood smear revealed Jolly bodies, Cabot rings, megalocytes. What type of anemia does the patient have?
a. Iron deficiency anemia
*b. B_12 and folic acid deficiency anemia
c. Hemolytic anemia
d. Hypoplastic anemia
e. Iron refractory anemia
1215. Blood test is as follows: erythrocytes - 1,5cdot 10^12/l; hemoglobin - 60 g/l; blood color index - 1,4; leukocytes - 3,0cdot 10^9/l, thrombocytes - 1,2cdot 10^10/l, reticulocytes - 0,2%. Blood smear revealed Jolly bodies, Cabot rings, megalocytes. What type of anemia does the patient have?
a. Iron deficiency anemia
b. Hypoplastic anemia
c. Iron refractory anemia
d. Hemolytic anemia
*e. B_12 and folic acid deficiency anemia
1216. Blood test of a patient, who had been taking non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs for a long time, detected a sharp decrease in the amount of neutrophilic granulocytes, basophils, and eosinophils against the background of leukopenia. What pathological condition has developed in the patient?
*a. Agranulocytosis
b. Leukocytosis
c. Aleukia
d. Leukemia
e. Anemia
1217. Blood test of a patient, who had been taking non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs for a long time, detected a sharp decrease in the amount of neutrophilic granulocytes, basophils, and eosinophils against the background of leukopenia. What pathological condition has developed in the patient?
a. Anemia
b. Leukemia
c. Leukocytosis
*d. Agranulocytosis
e. Aleukia
1218. Blood test of a patient, who had been taking non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs for a long time, detected a sharp decrease in the amount of neutrophilic granulocytes, basophils, and eosinophils against the background of leukopenia. What pathological condition has developed in the patient?
a. Anemia
b. Leukocytosis
*c. Agranulocytosis
d. Aleukia
e. Leukemia
1219. Both scientific and folk medicine uses medicinal plant Glycyrrhiza glabra L. What part of the plant is harvested?
a. Grass
b. Leaves
c. Inflorescence
*d. Roots and rhizomes
e. Seeds
1220. Both scientific and folk medicine uses medicinal plant Glycyrrhiza glabra L. What part of the plant is harvested?
a. Inflorescence
*b. Roots and rhizomes
c. Seeds
d. Grass
e. Leaves
1221. Both scientific and folk medicine uses medicinal plant Glycyrrhiza glabra L. What part of the plant is harvested?
a. Leaves
b. Grass
*c. Roots and rhizomes
d. Seeds
e. Inflorescence
1222. Bromatometric determination of streptocide (Sulfanilamide) is performed by means of direct titration with a standard solution of potassium bromate. What is used as an indicator in this method of titration?
*a. Methyl orange
b. Eriochrome black T
c. Iron(III) thiocyanate
d. Phenolphthalein
e. Murexide
1223. Bromatometric determination of streptocide (Sulfanilamide) is performed by means of direct titration with a standard solution of potassium bromate. What is used as an indicator in this method of titration?
a. Murexide
*b. Methyl orange
c. Eriochrome black T
d. Iron(III) thiocyanate
e. Phenolphthalein
1224. Bromatometric determination of streptocide (Sulfanilamide) is performed by means of direct titration with a standard solution of potassium bromate. What is used as an indicator in this method of titration?
a. Phenolphthalein
b. Eriochrome black T
*c. Methyl orange
d. Murexide
e. Iron(III) thiocyanate
1225. By means of photoelectrocolorimetric analysis the concentration of the following can be determined:
a. Any type of solution
b. Turbid solution
c. Optically active substance
*d. Colored solution
e. Colorless solution
1226. By means of photoelectrocolorimetric analysis the concentration of the following can be determined:
a. Turbid solution
b. Colorless solution
c. Optically active substance
d. Any type of solution
*e. Colored solution
1227. C_7H_8O compound is an aromatic carbohydrate derivative and does not color with FeCl_3. Upon oxidation, it forms benzoic acid. Name this compound:
a. m-Cresol
b. p-Cresol
c. o-Cresol
d. Methylphenyl ether
*e. Benzyl alcohol
1228. C_7H_8O compound is an aromatic carbohydrate derivative and does not color with FeCl_3. Upon oxidation, it forms benzoic acid. Name this compound:
a. o-Cresol
b. p-Cresol
*c. Benzyl alcohol
d. Methylphenyl ether
e. m-Cresol
1229. C_7H_8O compound is an aromatic carbohydrate derivative and does not color with FeCl_3. Upon oxidation, it forms benzoic acid. Name this compound:
a. p-Cresol
b. Methylphenyl ether
c. m-Cresol
*d. Benzyl alcohol
e. o-Cresol
1230. Calcium carbonate crystals are deposited as clusters on the inner protrusions of a cell wall. What are these formations called?
a. Druses
b. Druses attached to cell membrane
c. Raphides
d. Styloids
*e. Cystoliths
1231. Calcium carbonate crystals are deposited as clusters on the inner protrusions of a cell wall. What are these formations called?
a. Raphides
b. Druses attached to cell membrane
c. Druses
d. Styloids
*e. Cystoliths
1232. Calcium carbonate crystals are deposited as clusters on the inner protrusions of a cell wall. What are these formations called?
a. Raphides
b. Styloids
c. Druses
d. Druses attached to cell membrane
*e. Cystoliths
1233. Calcium cations can be used as components of pharmaceuticals. Pharmacopoeial reaction for the detection of calcium cations is a reaction with a solution of:
a. Ammonium hydroxide
b. Hydrochloric acid
*c. Ammonium oxalate
d. Sodium hydroxide
e. Potassium iodide
1234. Calcium cations can be used as components of pharmaceuticals. Pharmacopoeial reaction for the detection of calcium cations is a reaction with a solution of:
a. Hydrochloric acid
b. Sodium hydroxide
c. Ammonium hydroxide
*d. Ammonium oxalate
e. Potassium iodide
1235. Calcium cations can be used as components of pharmaceuticals. Pharmacopoeial reaction for the detection of calcium cations is a reaction with a solution of:
a. Potassium iodide
b. Ammonium hydroxide
*c. Ammonium oxalate
d. Hydrochloric acid
e. Sodium hydroxide
1236. Calculation of thermal effects of chemical reactions at a pharmaceutical factory is based on the Hess law stating that reaction thermal effect is determined by:
a. Mechanism by which the chemical change occurs
b. Route by which the chemical change occurs
c. Process duration
d. Number of intermediate stages
*e. Initial and final state of system
1237. Calculation of thermal effects of chemical reactions at a pharmaceutical factory is based on the Hess law stating that reaction thermal effect is determined by:
a. Number of intermediate stages
b. Route by which the chemical change occurs
*c. Initial and final state of system
d. Process duration
e. Mechanism by which the chemical change occurs
1238. Calculation of thermal effects of chemical reactions at a pharmaceutical factory is based on the Hess law stating that reaction thermal effect is determined by:
a. Route by which the chemical change occurs
b. Process duration
c. Number of intermediate stages
d. Mechanism by which the chemical change occurs
*e. Initial and final state of system
1239. Calendula officinalis as a representative of Asteraceae family can be characterized by the following type of inflorescence:
a. Capitulum
*b. Anthodium
c. Corymb
d. Umbel
e. Catkin
1240. Calendula officinalis as a representative of Asteraceae family can be characterized by the following type of inflorescence:
a. Catkin
*b. Anthodium
c. Capitulum
d. Corymb
e. Umbel
1241. Calendula officinalis as a representative of Asteraceae family can be characterized by the following type of inflorescence:
a. Corymb
b. Umbel
*c. Anthodium
d. Capitulum
e. Catkin
1242. Cases of tonsillitis periodically occur in the children that attend a kindergarten. During preventive examination, a medical laboratory scientist obtained pharyngeal swabs from ten children and stained the obtained material using the Neisser technique. Microscopy detects thin yellow rod-shaped microorganisms with dark brown thickenings at their ends, arranged in the shape of Roman numerals X and V. What infectious disease can be caused by the detected causative agents?
*a. Diphtheria
b. Infectious mononucleosis
c. Tuberculosis
d. Scarlet fever
e. Pneumonia
1243. Cases of tonsillitis periodically occur in the children that attend a kindergarten. During preventive examination, a medical laboratory scientist obtained pharyngeal swabs from ten children and stained the obtained material using the Neisser technique. Microscopy detects thin yellow rod-shaped microorganisms with dark brown thickenings at their ends, arranged in the shape of Roman numerals X and V. What infectious disease can be caused by the detected causative agents?
a. Scarlet fever
*b. Diphtheria
c. Pneumonia
d. Infectious mononucleosis
e. Tuberculosis
1244. Cases of tonsillitis periodically occur in the children that attend a kindergarten. During preventive examination, a medical laboratory scientist obtained pharyngeal swabs from ten children and stained the obtained material using the Neisser technique. Microscopy detects thin yellow rod-shaped microorganisms with dark brown thickenings at their ends, arranged in the shape of Roman numerals X and V. What infectious disease can be caused by the detected causative agents?
a. Tuberculosis
b. Scarlet fever
c. Infectious mononucleosis
*d. Diphtheria
e. Pneumonia
1245. Catabolism of body's own tissue proteins is intensified during such diseases as thyrotoxicosis and tuberculosis. This process is attended by a certain compound been intensively synthesized in liver and subsequently excreted with urine. Name this compound:
a. Acetone bodies
*b. Urea
c. Nucleotides
d. Fatty acids
e. Glucose
1246. Catabolism of body's own tissue proteins is intensified during such diseases as thyrotoxicosis and tuberculosis. This process is attended by a certain compound been intensively synthesized in liver and subsequently excreted with urine. Name this compound:
a. Acetone bodies
b. Nucleotides
c. Fatty acids
d. Glucose
*e. Urea
1247. Catabolism of body's own tissue proteins is intensified during such diseases as thyrotoxicosis and tuberculosis. This process is attended by a certain compound been intensively synthesized in liver and subsequently excreted with urine. Name this compound:
a. Glucose
b. Nucleotides
c. Fatty acids
d. Acetone bodies
*e. Urea
1248. Catalysts are widely used in production of drugs. How can reaction acceleration in the presence of a catalyst be explained?
a. Activation energy increases
b. Collision frequency decreases
c. Total collision frequency increases
*d. Activation energy decreases
e. Molecule speed increases
1249. Catalysts are widely used in production of drugs. How can reaction acceleration in the presence of a catalyst be explained?
a. Collision frequency decreases
b. Activation energy increases
c. Molecule speed increases
d. Total collision frequency increases
*e. Activation energy decreases
1250. Catalysts are widely used in production of drugs. How can reaction acceleration in the presence of a catalyst be explained?
a. Total collision frequency increases
b. Collision frequency decreases
*c. Activation energy decreases
d. Activation energy increases
e. Molecule speed increases
1251. Causative agents of infectious diseases can be carried both by humans and animals. Name the group of infections that affect animals and can be passed onto humans:
a. Mixed
b. Anthroponoses
c. Sapronoses
d. Zoonoses
*e. Zooanthroponoses
1252. Causative agents of infectious diseases can be carried both by humans and animals. Name the group of infections that affect animals and can be passed onto humans:
a. Zoonoses
*b. Zooanthroponoses
c. Mixed
d. Sapronoses
e. Anthroponoses
1253. Causative agents of infectious diseases can be carried both by humans and animals. Name the group of infections that affect animals and can be passed onto humans:
a. Zoonoses
b. Mixed
c. Anthroponoses
d. Sapronoses
*e. Zooanthroponoses
1254. Cellulose hydrolysis produces the following disaccharide:
*a. Cellobiose
b. Glucose
c. Sucrose
d. Lactose
e. Maltose
1255. Cellulose hydrolysis produces the following disaccharide:
*a. Cellobiose
b. Maltose
c. Glucose
d. Sucrose
e. Lactose
1256. Cellulose hydrolysis produces the following disaccharide:
a. Maltose
b. Sucrose
*c. Cellobiose
d. Lactose
e. Glucose
1257. Cerebrospinal fluid of a patient diagnosed with meningitis was taken for analysis. To detect the causative agent the sample was inoculated in a nutrient medium. Prior to that a serum had been added to the medium. What causative agent is expected to be obtained in this case?
a. Mycobacteria
b. Viruses
c. Rickettsia
d. Staphylococcus
*e. Meningococcus
1258. Cerebrospinal fluid of a patient diagnosed with meningitis was taken for analysis. To detect the causative agent the sample was inoculated in a nutrient medium. Prior to that a serum had been added to the medium. What causative agent is expected to be obtained in this case?
a. Rickettsia
b. Staphylococcus
c. Viruses
d. Mycobacteria
*e. Meningococcus
1259. Cerebrospinal fluid of a patient diagnosed with meningitis was taken for analysis. To detect the causative agent the sample was inoculated in a nutrient medium. Prior to that a serum had been added to the medium. What causative agent is expected to be obtained in this case?
a. Staphylococcus
b. Rickettsia
c. Viruses
*d. Meningococcus
e. Mycobacteria
1260. Certain amino acids decarboxylate in large intestine producing toxic substances. What compound is produced from ornithine?
*a. Putrescine
b. Phenol
c. Arginine
d. Lysine
e. Indole
1261. Certain amino acids decarboxylate in large intestine producing toxic substances. What compound is produced from ornithine?
*a. Putrescine
b. Phenol
c. Indole
d. Lysine
e. Arginine
1262. Certain amino acids decarboxylate in large intestine producing toxic substances. What compound is produced from ornithine?
a. Lysine
b. Arginine
c. Phenol
*d. Putrescine
e. Indole
1263. Chemical equilibrium theory allows predicting the approaches that result in the maximum yield of medicines. What factor has no effect on the chemical equilibrium shift?
*a. Addition of a catalyst
b. Temperature change
c. A change in the concentration of the initial substances
d. Pressure change
e. A change in the concentration of products
1264. Chemical equilibrium theory allows predicting the approaches that result in the maximum yield of medicines. What factor has no effect on the chemical equilibrium shift?
a. A change in the concentration of the initial substances
b. A change in the concentration of products
c. Pressure change
*d. Addition of a catalyst
e. Temperature change
1265. Chloromethane is used in medicine as a local anesthetic. In the manufacturing of certain medicines, it is an intermediate product of the technological chain. What compound is formed as a result of alkaline hydrolysis of chloromethane according to the scheme given below? CH_3-Cl+NaOHxrightarrow H_2O  ?
*a. Methanol
b. Ethane
c. Sodium formate
d. Methane
e. Methanal
1266. Chloromethane is used in medicine as a local anesthetic. In the manufacturing of certain medicines, it is an intermediate product of the technological chain. What compound is formed as a result of alkaline hydrolysis of chloromethane according to the scheme given below? CH_3-Cl+NaOHxrightarrow H_2O  ?
a. Methanal
*b. Methanol
c. Sodium formate
d. Ethane
e. Methane
1267. Chloromethane is used in medicine as a local anesthetic. In the manufacturing of certain medicines, it is an intermediate product of the technological chain. What compound is formed as a result of alkaline hydrolysis of chloromethane according to the scheme given below? CH_3-Cl+NaOHxrightarrow H_2O  ?
a. Methane
b. Sodium formate
c. Methanal
*d. Methanol
e. Ethane
1268. Chlorophyta division representatives have chromatophores of various shapes in their cells. What genus includes species with ribbon-shaped chromatophores?
*a. Spirogyra
b. Spirulina
c. Chlamidomonas
d. Volvox
e. Chlorella
1269. Chlorophyta division representatives have chromatophores of various shapes in their cells. What genus includes species with ribbon-shaped chromatophores?
*a. Spirogyra
b. Volvox
c. Chlamidomonas
d. Spirulina
e. Chlorella
1270. Chlorophyta division representatives have chromatophores of various shapes in their cells. What genus includes species with ribbon-shaped chromatophores?
a. Chlorella
b. Chlamidomonas
c. Spirulina
*d. Spirogyra
e. Volvox
1271. Cholesterol synthesis inhibitors are used as antiatherosclerotic drugs. Select one such drug from the list:
*a. Lovastatin
b. Sulfanilamide
c. Chloramphenicol
d. Benzylpenicillin
e. Pancreatin
1272. Cholesterol synthesis inhibitors are used as antiatherosclerotic drugs. Select one such drug from the list:
a. Benzylpenicillin
b. Pancreatin
c. Chloramphenicol
d. Sulfanilamide
*e. Lovastatin
1273. Cholesterol synthesis inhibitors are used as antiatherosclerotic drugs. Select one such drug from the list:
a. Sulfanilamide
b. Chloramphenicol
c. Pancreatin
d. Benzylpenicillin
*e. Lovastatin
1274. Choose the colloid surfactant out of the substances listed below:
*a. Potassium oleate
b. Iodine
c. Gelatin
d. Sodium chloride
e. Polyethylene
1275. Choose the colloid surfactant out of the substances listed below:
*a. Potassium oleate
b. Polyethylene
c. Sodium chloride
d. Gelatin
e. Iodine
1276. Choose the colloid surfactant out of the substances listed below:
a. Iodine
b. Polyethylene
c. Gelatin
d. Sodium chloride
*e. Potassium oleate
1277. Choose the indicator and titration method to determine hydrogen carbonate ions in a drug:
a. Methyl-orange, alkalimetry
*b. Methyl-orange, acidimetry
c. Phenolphthalein, alkalimetry
d. Phenolphthalein, acidimetry
e. Murexide, acidimetry
1278. Choose the indicator and titration method to determine hydrogen carbonate ions in a drug:
a. Methyl-orange, alkalimetry
b. Murexide, acidimetry
c. Phenolphthalein, acidimetry
d. Phenolphthalein, alkalimetry
*e. Methyl-orange, acidimetry
1279. Choose the indicator and titration method to determine hydrogen carbonate ions in a drug:
a. Phenolphthalein, alkalimetry
b. Methyl-orange, alkalimetry
c. Phenolphthalein, acidimetry
*d. Methyl-orange, acidimetry
e. Murexide, acidimetry
1280. Choose the most efficient way of convallariae glycoside administration for acute cardiac failure treatment:
*a. Intravenous
b. Subcutaneous
c. Intramuscular
d. Inhalational
e. Oral
1281. Choose the most efficient way of convallariae glycoside administration for acute cardiac failure treatment:
a. Intramuscular
b. Inhalational
*c. Intravenous
d. Oral
e. Subcutaneous
1282. Choose the most efficient way of convallariae glycoside administration for acute cardiac failure treatment:
a. Oral
*b. Intravenous
c. Intramuscular
d. Inhalational
e. Subcutaneous
1283. Choose the potent fast-acting diuretic to induce forced diuresis:
a. Hydrochlorothiazide
b. Acetazolamide
c. Triamterene
d. Spironolactone
*e. Furosemide
1284. Choose the potent fast-acting diuretic to induce forced diuresis:
a. Spironolactone
*b. Furosemide
c. Triamterene
d. Hydrochlorothiazide
e. Acetazolamide
1285. Choose the potent fast-acting diuretic to induce forced diuresis:
a. Spironolactone
b. Triamterene
c. Acetazolamide
*d. Furosemide
e. Hydrochlorothiazide
1286. Choose the weakest carboxylic acid basing on its pKa value:
*a. Propionic acid (рКа = 4.9)
b. Butyric acid (рКа = 4.82)
c. Formic acid (рКа = 3.7)
d. Acetic acid (рКа = 4.7)
e. Lactic acid (рКа = 3.9)
1287. Choose the weakest carboxylic acid basing on its pKa value:
*a. Propionic acid (рКа = 4.9)
b. Formic acid (рКа = 3.7)
c. Butyric acid (рКа = 4.82)
d. Lactic acid (рКа = 3.9)
e. Acetic acid (рКа = 4.7)
1288. Choose the weakest carboxylic acid basing on its pKa value:
a. Butyric acid (рКа = 4.82)
b. Lactic acid (рКа = 3.9)
c. Formic acid (рКа = 3.7)
*d. Propionic acid (рКа = 4.9)
e. Acetic acid (рКа = 4.7)
1289. Chromatographic analysis methods differ in their mechanism of sorbent-sorbate interaction. What partition mechanism is used in ion-exchange chromatography?
*a. Different ion-exchange capacity of the substances
b. Different solubility of the solutes in the stationary phase
c. Production of coordination compounds of different stability in the phase or on the sorbent surface
d. Different adsorption capacity of the solid sorbent towards different substances
e. Solutes and sorbent producing precipitates of different solubility
1290. Chromatographic analysis methods differ in their mechanism of sorbent-sorbate interaction. What partition mechanism is used in ion-exchange chromatography?
a. Different adsorption capacity of the solid sorbent towards different substances
b. Solutes and sorbent producing precipitates of different solubility
*c. Different ion-exchange capacity of the substances
d. Different solubility of the solutes in the stationary phase
e. Production of coordination compounds of different stability in the phase or on the sorbent surface
1291. Chromatographic analysis methods differ in their mechanism of sorbent-sorbate interaction. What partition mechanism is used in ion-exchange chromatography?
a. Solutes and sorbent producing precipitates of different solubility
*b. Different ion-exchange capacity of the substances
c. Different solubility of the solutes in the stationary phase
d. Production of coordination compounds of different stability in the phase or on the sorbent surface
e. Different adsorption capacity of the solid sorbent towards different substances
1292. Chromatographic methods can be classified by the mechanism of the separation process. What type of chromatography includes the gas-liquid chromatographic method?
*a. Distribution chromatography
b. Ion exchange chromatography
c. Gel chromatography
d. Affinity chromatography
e. Adsorption chromatography
1293. Chromatographic methods can be classified by the mechanism of the separation process. What type of chromatography includes the gas-liquid chromatographic method?
a. Affinity chromatography
b. Adsorption chromatography
c. Ion exchange chromatography
d. Gel chromatography
*e. Distribution chromatography
1294. Chromatographic methods can be classified by the mechanism of the separation process. What type of chromatography includes the gas-liquid chromatographic method?
a. Ion exchange chromatography
b. Adsorption chromatography
c. Affinity chromatography
d. Gel chromatography
*e. Distribution chromatography
1295. Chromatographic methods can be classified by the mechanism of the separation process. What type of chromatography is gas-liquid chromatography?
a. Affinity chromatography
b. Gel-filtration chromatography
c. Adsorption chromatography
*d. Distribution chromatography
e. Ion-exchange chromatography
1296. Chromatographic methods can be classified by the mechanism of the separation process. What type of chromatography is gas-liquid chromatography?
a. Affinity chromatography
b. Gel-filtration chromatography
c. Adsorption chromatography
d. Ion-exchange chromatography
*e. Distribution chromatography
1297. Chromatographic methods can be classified by the mechanism of the separation process. What type of chromatography is gas-liquid chromatography?
a. Ion-exchange chromatography
b. Adsorption chromatography
c. Gel-filtration chromatography
d. Affinity chromatography
*e. Distribution chromatography
1298. Classification of anions is based on different solubility of their salts with Ba^2+ and Ag^+ ions. Anions of the 1st analytical group form salts poorly soluble in water with the following ions:
a. Ag^+ (acid medium)
b. Ag^+ (alkaline medium)
c. Ag^+ (neutral medium)
*d. Ba^2+ (alkaline or neutral medium)
e. Ag^+ (ammonia buffer medium)
1299. Classification of anions is based on different solubility of their salts with Ba^2+ and Ag^+ ions. Anions of the 1st analytical group form salts poorly soluble in water with the following ions:
a. Ag^+ (acid medium)
b. Ag^+ (ammonia buffer medium)
c. Ag^+ (alkaline medium)
d. Ag^+ (neutral medium)
*e. Ba^2+ (alkaline or neutral medium)
1300. Classification of anions is based on different solubility of their salts with Ba^2+ and Ag^+ ions. Anions of the 1st analytical group form salts poorly soluble in water with the following ions:
a. Ag^+ (neutral medium)
b. Ag^+ (alkaline medium)
*c. Ba^2+ (alkaline or neutral medium)
d. Ag^+ (acid medium)
e. Ag^+ (ammonia buffer medium)
1301. Coagulation of hydrophobic sols occurs after a certain amount of electrolyte is added. How do we call the minimal concentration of electrolyte that induces colloid solution coagulation?
*a. Coagulation threshold
b. Concentration
c. Condensation
d. Coagulation ability
e. Neutralization
1302. Coagulation of hydrophobic sols occurs after a certain amount of electrolyte is added. How do we call the minimal concentration of electrolyte that induces colloid solution coagulation?
a. Concentration
b. Condensation
c. Neutralization
*d. Coagulation threshold
e. Coagulation ability
1303. Coagulation of hydrophobic sols occurs after a certain amount of electrolyte is added. How do we call the minimal concentration of electrolyte that induces colloid solution coagulation?
a. Condensation
*b. Coagulation threshold
c. Neutralization
d. Concentration
e. Coagulation ability
1304. Coagulation of sols under the effect of electrolytes can be determined by a general rule. Name this rule.
*a. Schulze-Hardy rule
b. Gibbs rule
c. Duclos-Traube rule
d. Arrhenius law
e. Van't Hoff rule
1305. Coagulation of sols under the effect of electrolytes can be determined by a general rule. Name this rule.
a. Arrhenius law
*b. Schulze-Hardy rule
c. Duclos-Traube rule
d. Van't Hoff rule
e. Gibbs rule
1306. Coagulation of sols under the effect of electrolytes can be determined by a general rule. Name this rule.
a. Arrhenius law
b. Gibbs rule
c. Duclos-Traube rule
d. Van't Hoff rule
*e. Schulze-Hardy rule
1307. Collagen, gelatin, keratin, and myosin are the proteins that are formed with peptide bonds and resemble long threads in shape. Name this type of proteins:
a. Chain proteins
*b. Fibrillar proteins
c. -
d. Structured proteins
e. Globular proteins
1308. Collagen, gelatin, keratin, and myosin are the proteins that are formed with peptide bonds and resemble long threads in shape. Name this type of proteins:
a. Chain proteins
b. -
*c. Fibrillar proteins
d. Structured proteins
e. Globular proteins
1309. Collagen, gelatin, keratin, and myosin are the proteins that are formed with peptide bonds and resemble long threads in shape. Name this type of proteins:
a. Chain proteins
b. -
c. Globular proteins
*d. Fibrillar proteins
e. Structured proteins
1310. Colloidal systems are widely used in medicine. In emulsions:
*a. Dispersed medium - liquid, continuous medium - liquid
b. Dispersed medium - gas, continuous medium - liquid
c. Dispersed medium - liquid, continuous medium - gas
d. Dispersed medium - liquid, continuous medium - solid
e. Dispersed medium - gas, continuous medium - solid
1311. Colloidal systems are widely used in medicine. In emulsions:
a. Dispersed medium - gas, continuous medium - solid
b. Dispersed medium - gas, continuous medium - liquid
c. Dispersed medium - liquid, continuous medium - gas
*d. Dispersed medium - liquid, continuous medium - liquid
e. Dispersed medium - liquid, continuous medium - solid
1312. Colloidal systems are widely used in medicine. In emulsions:
a. Dispersed medium - gas, continuous medium - solid
b. Dispersed medium - gas, continuous medium - liquid
c. Dispersed medium - liquid, continuous medium - solid
*d. Dispersed medium - liquid, continuous medium - liquid
e. Dispersed medium - liquid, continuous medium - gas
1313. Colloidal systems are widely used in medicine. In pastes:
a. Dispersed medium - liquid, continuous medium - gas
b. Dispersed medium - solid, continuous medium - gas
c. Dispersed medium - solid, continuous medium - solid
d. Dispersed medium - liquid, continuous medium - liquid
*e. Dispersed medium - solid, continuous medium - liquid
1314. Colloidal systems are widely used in medicine. In pastes:
a. Dispersed medium - liquid, continuous medium - liquid
*b. Dispersed medium - solid, continuous medium - liquid
c. Dispersed medium - liquid, continuous medium - gas
d. Dispersed medium - solid, continuous medium - solid
e. Dispersed medium - solid, continuous medium - gas
1315. Colloidal systems are widely used in medicine. In pastes:
a. Dispersed medium - solid, continuous medium - gas
b. Dispersed medium - liquid, continuous medium - liquid
*c. Dispersed medium - solid, continuous medium - liquid
d. Dispersed medium - liquid, continuous medium - gas
e. Dispersed medium - solid, continuous medium - solid
1316. Common nettle, hop, black elderberry relate to the plants that require soils rich in nitrogen compounds, that is, such plants are called:
*a. Nitrophytes
b. Calciphiles
c. Calciphobes
d. Nitrophobes
e. Halophytes
1317. Common nettle, hop, black elderberry relate to the plants that require soils rich in nitrogen compounds, that is, such plants are called:
*a. Nitrophytes
b. Calciphobes
c. Halophytes
d. Nitrophobes
e. Calciphiles
1318. Common nettle, hop, black elderberry relate to the plants that require soils rich in nitrogen compounds, that is, such plants are called:
a. Calciphiles
b. Calciphobes
c. Halophytes
d. Nitrophobes
*e. Nitrophytes
1319. Complex biological systems contain components such as electrolytes, non-electrolytes, and proteins that together create osmotic pressure. What part of osmotic pressure is formed primarily by proteins?
a. Cellular pressure
b. -
*c. Oncotic pressure
d. Internal pressure
e. Biological pressure
1320. Complex biological systems contain components such as electrolytes, non-electrolytes, and proteins that together create osmotic pressure. What part of osmotic pressure is formed primarily by proteins?
a. Cellular pressure
b. -
c. Biological pressure
d. Internal pressure
*e. Oncotic pressure
1321. Complex biological systems contain components such as electrolytes, non-electrolytes, and proteins that together create osmotic pressure. What part of osmotic pressure is formed primarily by proteins?
a. Cellular pressure
b. -
c. Internal pressure
*d. Oncotic pressure
e. Biological pressure
1322. Complexonometry is a titrimetric method of analysis based on the interaction of polydentate ligand complexes with cations of alkaline earth and heavy metals, which results in formation of strong, easily water-soluble compounds. Solution of what substance is used in complexonometry as a titrant?
a. Silver(I) nitrate
*b. Trilon B (ethylenediaminetetraacetic  acid tetrasodium salt)
c. Potassium dichromate
d. Sodium thiosulfate
e. Sulfuric acid
1323. Complexonometry is a titrimetric method of analysis based on the interaction of polydentate ligand complexes with cations of alkaline earth and heavy metals, which results in formation of strong, easily water-soluble compounds. Solution of what substance is used in complexonometry as a titrant?
a. Sodium thiosulfate
*b. Trilon B (ethylenediaminetetraacetic  acid tetrasodium salt)
c. Potassium dichromate
d. Sulfuric acid
e. Silver(I) nitrate
1324. Complexonometry is a titrimetric method of analysis based on the interaction of polydentate ligand complexes with cations of alkaline earth and heavy metals, which results in formation of strong, easily water-soluble compounds. Solution of what substance is used in complexonometry as a titrant?
a. Sodium thiosulfate
b. Sulfuric acid
*c. Trilon B (ethylenediaminetetraacetic  acid tetrasodium salt)
d. Silver(I) nitrate
e. Potassium dichromate
1325. Conducting tissue cells are live and connected to the sieve tube elements. It is characteristic of:
a. Collenchyma
b. Tracheids
*c. Companion cells
d. Vessels
e. Sclerenchyma
1326. Conducting tissue cells are live and connected to the sieve tube elements. It is characteristic of:
a. Tracheids
b. Collenchyma
c. Vessels
*d. Companion cells
e. Sclerenchyma
1327. Conducting tissue cells are live and connected to the sieve tube elements. It is characteristic of:
a. Vessels
b. Collenchyma
*c. Companion cells
d. Sclerenchyma
e. Tracheids
1328. Corn stalks typically have adventitious roots in their lower parts. These roots combine the functions of:
*a. Nutrition and support
b. Respiration and assimilation
c. Assimilation and absorption
d. Nutrition and respiration
e. Retraction or contraction
1329. Corn stalks typically have adventitious roots in their lower parts. These roots combine the functions of:
a. Nutrition and respiration
*b. Nutrition and support
c. Respiration and assimilation
d. Retraction or contraction
e. Assimilation and absorption
1330. Corn stalks typically have adventitious roots in their lower parts. These roots combine the functions of:
a. Retraction or contraction
b. Respiration and assimilation
*c. Nutrition and support
d. Assimilation and absorption
e. Nutrition and respiration
1331. Corolla of a zygomorphic bisexual flower consists of 5 petals: the largest one is called a banner, two lateral - wings, and two fused together - keel. This corolla is characteristic of Fabacea family and is called:
*a. Papilionaceous
b. Funnelform
c. Lingulate
d. Rotate
e. Tubular
1332. Corolla of a zygomorphic bisexual flower consists of 5 petals: the largest one is called a banner, two lateral - wings, and two fused together - keel. This corolla is characteristic of Fabacea family and is called:
a. Funnelform
b. Lingulate
*c. Papilionaceous
d. Rotate
e. Tubular
1333. Corolla of a zygomorphic bisexual flower consists of 5 petals: the largest one is called a banner, two lateral - wings, and two fused together - keel. This corolla is characteristic of Fabacea family and is called:
a. Lingulate
b. Rotate
*c. Papilionaceous
d. Funnelform
e. Tubular
1334. Corolla of a zygomorphic monoecious flower consists of 5 petals, the biggest is "banner", two lateral are "wings", and the last two are fused together to form "keel". Name the described corolla that is characteristic of medicinal plants of the Fabaceae family.
*a. Papilionaceous
b. Tubular
c. Ligulate
d. Saucer-shaped
e. Funnelform
1335. Corolla of a zygomorphic monoecious flower consists of 5 petals, the biggest is "banner", two lateral are "wings", and the last two are fused together to form "keel". Name the described corolla that is characteristic of medicinal plants of the Fabaceae family.
a. Funnelform
b. Tubular
*c. Papilionaceous
d. Ligulate
e. Saucer-shaped
1336. Corolla of a zygomorphic monoecious flower consists of 5 petals, the biggest is "banner", two lateral are "wings", and the last two are fused together to form "keel". Name the described corolla that is characteristic of medicinal plants of the Fabaceae family.
a. Ligulate
b. Funnelform
*c. Papilionaceous
d. Tubular
e. Saucer-shaped
1337. Coulometry is based on measuring the amount of electricity needed for an electrode reaction. What law is the basis for coulometric determination of substances?
a. Beer-Bouguer-Lambert law
b. Newton law
*c. Faraday law
d. Stokes law
e. Coulomb law
1338. Coulometry is based on measuring the amount of electricity needed for an electrode reaction. What law is the basis for coulometric determination of substances?
a. Coulomb law
b. Beer-Bouguer-Lambert law
*c. Faraday law
d. Newton law
e. Stokes law
1339. Coulometry is based on measuring the amount of electricity needed for an electrode reaction. What law is the basis for coulometric determination of substances?
a. Stokes law
*b. Faraday law
c. Beer-Bouguer-Lambert law
d. Newton law
e. Coulomb law
1340. Coumarins, vitamin K antagonists, suppress the processes of blood coagulation. What protein synthesis is blocked by coumarins?
*a. Prothrombin
b. Ceruloplasmin
c. Gamma globulin
d. Albumin
e. Transferrin
1341. Coumarins, vitamin K antagonists, suppress the processes of blood coagulation. What protein synthesis is blocked by coumarins?
a. Albumin
b. Transferrin
*c. Prothrombin
d. Ceruloplasmin
e. Gamma globulin
1342. Coumarins, vitamin K antagonists, suppress the processes of blood coagulation. What protein synthesis is blocked by coumarins?
a. Ceruloplasmin
b. Albumin
c. Transferrin
*d. Prothrombin
e. Gamma globulin
1343. Cryoscopic constants of water, benzene, chloroform, acetic acid and camphor equal to 1,86; 5,12; 4,9; 3,9; 40,0 respectively. Which of these solvents should be selected for the most accurate determination of the molar mass of a drug substance (nonelectrolyte) by the cryoscopic method?
a. Benzene
b. Acetic acid
*c. Camphor
d. Chloroform
e. Water
1344. Cryoscopic constants of water, benzene, chloroform, acetic acid and camphor equal to 1,86; 5,12; 4,9; 3,9; 40,0 respectively. Which of these solvents should be selected for the most accurate determination of the molar mass of a drug substance (nonelectrolyte) by the cryoscopic method?
a. Benzene
b. Water
c. Acetic acid
*d. Camphor
e. Chloroform
1345. Cryoscopic constants of water, benzene, chloroform, acetic acid and camphor equal to 1,86; 5,12; 4,9; 3,9; 40,0 respectively. Which of these solvents should be selected for the most accurate determination of the molar mass of a drug substance (nonelectrolyte) by the cryoscopic method?
a. Chloroform
*b. Camphor
c. Benzene
d. Acetic acid
e. Water
1346. Crystalline lead(IV) dioxide in the presence of concentrated nitric acid is used to detect the presence of manganese(II) cations in a solution. What visual analytical effect is observed in the process?
a. A blue precipitate is formed
b. The solution colors green
c. The solution colors yellow
*d. The solution colors pink
e. A white precipitate is formed
1347. Crystalline lead(IV) dioxide in the presence of concentrated nitric acid is used to detect the presence of manganese(II) cations in a solution. What visual analytical effect is observed in the process?
a. A white precipitate is formed
*b. The solution colors pink
c. The solution colors green
d. The solution colors yellow
e. A blue precipitate is formed
1348. Crystalline lead(IV) dioxide in the presence of concentrated nitric acid is used to detect the presence of manganese(II) cations in a solution. What visual analytical effect is observed in the process?
a. The solution colors green
b. A white precipitate is formed
c. A blue precipitate is formed
*d. The solution colors pink
e. The solution colors yellow
1349. Cytology has detected sex chromatin (Barr bodies) in interphase cell nuclei of a 23-year-old man. What chromosomal disorder is it characteristic of?
a. Cri-du-chat syndrome
b. Trisomy X
c. Turner syndrome
d. Down syndrome
*e. Klinefelter syndrome
1350. Cytology has detected sex chromatin (Barr bodies) in interphase cell nuclei of a 23-year-old man. What chromosomal disorder is it characteristic of?
a. Down syndrome
b. Trisomy X
c. Turner syndrome
d. Cri-du-chat syndrome
*e. Klinefelter syndrome
1351. Cytology has detected sex chromatin (Barr bodies) in interphase cell nuclei of a 23-year-old man. What chromosomal disorder is it characteristic of?
a. Down syndrome
b. Turner syndrome
c. Trisomy X
*d. Klinefelter syndrome
e. Cri-du-chat syndrome
1352. Datura stramonium fruit is a:
a. Legume with two seeds
*b. Spiny capsule
c. Pseudomonocarpous drupe
d. Trihedral nutlet
e. Silicular capsule
1353. Datura stramonium fruit is a:
a. Pseudomonocarpous drupe
b. Silicular capsule
*c. Spiny capsule
d. Legume with two seeds
e. Trihedral nutlet
1354. Datura stramonium fruit is a:
a. Silicular capsule
b. Pseudomonocarpous drupe
*c. Spiny capsule
d. Trihedral nutlet
e. Legume with two seeds
1355. Decarboxylation of histidine amino acid leads to formation of histamine in the cells. What enzyme ensures neutralization of this biogenic amine?
*a. Diamine oxidase (DAO)
b. Catalase
c. Monoamine oxidase (MAO)
d. Aminotransferase
e. Aminopeptidase
1356. Decarboxylation of histidine amino acid leads to formation of histamine in the cells. What enzyme ensures neutralization of this biogenic amine?
a. Aminotransferase
b. Aminopeptidase
*c. Diamine oxidase (DAO)
d. Monoamine oxidase (MAO)
e. Catalase
1357. Decarboxylation of histidine amino acid leads to formation of histamine in the cells. What enzyme ensures neutralization of this biogenic amine?
a. Catalase
b. Aminopeptidase
c. Monoamine oxidase (MAO)
d. Aminotransferase
*e. Diamine oxidase (DAO)
1358. Dietary fiber is a component of plant foods that plays an important role in prevention of gastrointestinal diseases. What polysaccharide is a primary component of plant cell walls?
a. Chitin
b. Glycogen
c. Chondroitin sulfate
*d. Cellulose
e. Starch
1359. Dietary fiber is a component of plant foods that plays an important role in prevention of gastrointestinal diseases. What polysaccharide is a primary component of plant cell walls?
a. Chitin
b. Starch
c. Glycogen
d. Chondroitin sulfate
*e. Cellulose
1360. Dietary fiber is a component of plant foods that plays an important role in prevention of gastrointestinal diseases. What polysaccharide is a primary component of plant cell walls?
a. Chondroitin sulfate
b. Starch
c. Chitin
d. Glycogen
*e. Cellulose
1361. Digestive enzymes produced in pancreas are inactive. What enzyme in intestines starts the transformation process of proenzymes into enzymes?
a. Chymotrypsin
b. Aminopeptidase
c. Amylase
*d. Enterokinase
e. Lactase
1362. Digestive enzymes produced in pancreas are inactive. What enzyme in intestines starts the transformation process of proenzymes into enzymes?
a. Chymotrypsin
b. Lactase
c. Amylase
d. Aminopeptidase
*e. Enterokinase
1363. Digestive enzymes produced in pancreas are inactive. What enzyme in intestines starts the transformation process of proenzymes into enzymes?
a. Lactase
b. Amylase
c. Aminopeptidase
*d. Enterokinase
e. Chymotrypsin
1364. Dimethylethylamine belongs to:
*a. Tertiary amines
b. Secondary amines
c. -
d. Primary amines
e. Quaternary ammonium salts
1365. Dimethylethylamine belongs to:
*a. Tertiary amines
b. Secondary amines
c. Primary amines
d. -
e. Quaternary ammonium salts
1366. Dimethylethylamine belongs to:
a. Quaternary ammonium salts
b. -
c. Primary amines
d. Secondary amines
*e. Tertiary amines
1367. Direct complexometric titration is used to determine the concentration of:
a. Hydroxide ions
b. Hydrogen ions
c. Strong acid anions
d. Weak acid anions
*e. Metal cations
1368. Direct complexometric titration is used to determine the concentration of:
a. Strong acid anions
b. Hydrogen ions
*c. Metal cations
d. Hydroxide ions
e. Weak acid anions
1369. Direct complexometric titration is used to determine the concentration of:
a. Weak acid anions
*b. Metal cations
c. Hydrogen ions
d. Hydroxide ions
e. Strong acid anions
1370. Disintegration of adenosine nucleotides results in release of ammonia. What enzyme plays the key role in ammonia synthesis from these compounds?
a. Amylase
*b. Adenosine deaminase
c. Alanine transaminase
d. Alcohol dehydrogenase
e. Lactate dehydrogenase
1371. Disintegration of adenosine nucleotides results in release of ammonia. What enzyme plays the key role in ammonia synthesis from these compounds?
a. Amylase
b. Lactate dehydrogenase
c. Alanine transaminase
d. Alcohol dehydrogenase
*e. Adenosine deaminase
1372. Disperse systems compose a large part of all dosage forms. Point out the bound disperse system:
a. Aerosol
b. Lyosol
c. Emulsion
d. Suspension
*e. Gel
1373. Disperse systems compose a large part of all dosage forms. Point out the bound disperse system:
a. Aerosol
b. Suspension
*c. Gel
d. Emulsion
e. Lyosol
1374. Disperse systems compose a large part of all dosage forms. Point out the bound disperse system:
a. Lyosol
b. Emulsion
c. Suspension
*d. Gel
e. Aerosol
1375. Dissociation degree in 0.01 M water solution is the same for all the strong electrolytes listed below. Name the substance with the highest boiling temperature:
*a. Al_2(SO_4)_3
b. Na_3PO_4
c. Cu(NO_3)_2
d. KCl
e. K_3PO_4
1376. Dissociation degree in 0.01 M water solution is the same for all the strong electrolytes listed below. Name the substance with the highest boiling temperature:
a. KCl
b. Cu(NO_3)_2
c. K_3PO_4
*d. Al_2(SO_4)_3
e. Na_3PO_4
1377. Dissociation degree in 0.01 M water solution is the same for all the strong electrolytes listed below. Name the substance with the highest boiling temperature:
a. K_3PO_4
b. Cu(NO_3)_2
c. Na_3PO_4
d. KCl
*e. Al_2(SO_4)_3
1378. Dopplerography detected bilateral stenosis of renal arteries in a patient with the blood pressure of 180/100 mm Hg. Activation of what system is the most likely cause of the persistently elevated blood pressure in this case?
*a. Renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system
b. Central nervous system
c. Hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis
d. Kinin-kallikrein system
e. Sympathoadrenal system
1379. Dopplerography detected bilateral stenosis of renal arteries in a patient with the blood pressure of 180/100 mm Hg. Activation of what system is the most likely cause of the persistently elevated blood pressure in this case?
*a. Renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system
b. Hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis
c. Kinin-kallikrein system
d. Central nervous system
e. Sympathoadrenal system
1380. Dopplerography detected bilateral stenosis of renal arteries in a patient with the blood pressure of 180/100 mm Hg. Activation of what system is the most likely cause of the persistently elevated blood pressure in this case?
a. Hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis
b. Central nervous system
c. Sympathoadrenal system
*d. Renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system
e. Kinin-kallikrein system
1381. Drafting of analytical normative documents requires skills in macro- and microscopical analysis of plant organs. If a microslide mount shows clearly visible multilayered palisade (columnar) parenchyma, it is characteristic of:
*a. Leaves
b. Fern rhizomes
c. Stems of dicotyledons
d. Adventitious roots
e. Roots
1382. Drafting of analytical normative documents requires skills in macro- and microscopical analysis of plant organs. If a microslide mount shows clearly visible multilayered palisade (columnar) parenchyma, it is characteristic of:
a. Adventitious roots
b. Fern rhizomes
c. Roots
*d. Leaves
e. Stems of dicotyledons
1383. Drafting of analytical normative documents requires skills in macro- and microscopical analysis of plant organs. If a microslide mount shows clearly visible multilayered palisade (columnar) parenchyma, it is characteristic of:
a. Adventitious roots
b. Fern rhizomes
c. Stems of dicotyledons
d. Roots
*e. Leaves
1384. Due to a case of diphtheria in the kindergarten, all the children and personnel undergo examination for early detection of the disease and its carriers. What material must be taken for analysis?
*a. Pharyngeal and nasal swabs
b. Pharyngeal swab
c. Blood
d. Wound material
e. Nasal swab
1385. Due to a case of diphtheria in the kindergarten, all the children and personnel undergo examination for early detection of the disease and its carriers. What material must be taken for analysis?
*a. Pharyngeal and nasal swabs
b. Wound material
c. Blood
d. Pharyngeal swab
e. Nasal swab
1386. Due to a case of diphtheria in the kindergarten, all the children and personnel undergo examination for early detection of the disease and its carriers. What material must be taken for analysis?
a. Blood
*b. Pharyngeal and nasal swabs
c. Wound material
d. Pharyngeal swab
e. Nasal swab
1387. Due to spleen rupture a woman has developed internal hemorrhage with signs of severe hypoxia. What anatomical structure is the most susceptible to hypoxia?
a. Kidneys
*b. Cerebral cortex
c. Lungs
d. Muscles
e. Stomach
1388. Due to spleen rupture a woman has developed internal hemorrhage with signs of severe hypoxia. What anatomical structure is the most susceptible to hypoxia?
a. Kidneys
b. Muscles
*c. Cerebral cortex
d. Lungs
e. Stomach
1389. Due to spleen rupture a woman has developed internal hemorrhage with signs of severe hypoxia. What anatomical structure is the most susceptible to hypoxia?
a. Muscles
b. Kidneys
c. Lungs
d. Stomach
*e. Cerebral cortex
1390. During a hypertensive crisis, magnesium sulfate was administered to the patient, resulting in a sharp decrease of blood pressure. What drug can be administered to eliminate the side effects of magnesium sulfate?
a. Potassium chloride
*b. Calcium chloride
c. Sodium bromide
d. Trilon B (disodium EDTA)
e. Sodium sulfate
1391. During a hypertensive crisis, magnesium sulfate was administered to the patient, resulting in a sharp decrease of blood pressure. What drug can be administered to eliminate the side effects of magnesium sulfate?
a. Trilon B (disodium EDTA)
b. Potassium chloride
c. Sodium bromide
*d. Calcium chloride
e. Sodium sulfate
1392. During a hypertensive crisis, magnesium sulfate was administered to the patient, resulting in a sharp decrease of blood pressure. What drug can be administered to eliminate the side effects of magnesium sulfate?
a. Trilon B (disodium EDTA)
b. Potassium chloride
c. Sodium sulfate
d. Sodium bromide
*e. Calcium chloride
1393. During a morphological description of Salvia sclarea, students noticed its bright bracts. They serve to attract pollinating insects and are a modification of a:
*a. Leaf
b. Pedicel
c. Androecium
d. Receptacle
e. Shoot
1394. During a morphological description of Salvia sclarea, students noticed its bright bracts. They serve to attract pollinating insects and are a modification of a:
a. Shoot
*b. Leaf
c. Receptacle
d. Androecium
e. Pedicel
1395. During a morphological description of Salvia sclarea, students noticed its bright bracts. They serve to attract pollinating insects and are a modification of a:
a. Shoot
b. Receptacle
c. Androecium
*d. Leaf
e. Pedicel
1396. During a practical session in pharmaceutical botany, the students were studying herbarium specimens of Asteraceae family plants. What plant of this family has flowers that are all yellow, zygomorphic, ligulate, and bisexual?
*a. Taraxacum officialis
b. Centaurea cyanus
c. Achillea millefolium
d. Echinacea purpurea
e. Bidens tripartita
1397. During a practical session in pharmaceutical botany, the students were studying herbarium specimens of Asteraceae family plants. What plant of this family has flowers that are all yellow, zygomorphic, ligulate, and bisexual?
a. Achillea millefolium
b. Echinacea purpurea
c. Centaurea cyanus
d. Bidens tripartita
*e. Taraxacum officialis
1398. During a practical session in pharmaceutical botany, the students were studying herbarium specimens of Asteraceae family plants. What plant of this family has flowers that are all yellow, zygomorphic, ligulate, and bisexual?
a. Centaurea cyanus
b. Echinacea purpurea
c. Bidens tripartita
*d. Taraxacum officialis
e. Achillea millefolium
1399. During a practical skill-building session, in the Konheim experiment, a student observes the dynamics of vascular reactions and changes in the blood circulation in an inflammatory focus. Name the correct sequence of the stages, characteristic of acute inflammation development:
a. Arterial hyperemia, venous hyperemia, prestasis, stasis, spasm of arterioles
b. Venous hyperemia, arterial hyperemia,  prestasis, stasis, spasm of arterioles
c. Prestasis, stasis, spasm of arterioles,  arterial hyperemia, venous hyperemia
*d. Spasm of arterioles, arterial hyperemia, venous hyperemia, prestasis, stasis
e. Venous hyperemia, stasis, spasm of  arterioles, arterial hyperemia, prestasis
1400. During a practical skill-building session, in the Konheim experiment, a student observes the dynamics of vascular reactions and changes in the blood circulation in an inflammatory focus. Name the correct sequence of the stages, characteristic of acute inflammation development:
a. Arterial hyperemia, venous hyperemia, prestasis, stasis, spasm of arterioles
b. Venous hyperemia, arterial hyperemia,  prestasis, stasis, spasm of arterioles
c. Venous hyperemia, stasis, spasm of  arterioles, arterial hyperemia, prestasis
d. Prestasis, stasis, spasm of arterioles,  arterial hyperemia, venous hyperemia
*e. Spasm of arterioles, arterial hyperemia, venous hyperemia, prestasis, stasis
1401. During a practical skill-building session, in the Konheim experiment, a student observes the dynamics of vascular reactions and changes in the blood circulation in an inflammatory focus. Name the correct sequence of the stages, characteristic of acute inflammation development:
a. Venous hyperemia, arterial hyperemia,  prestasis, stasis, spasm of arterioles
b. Venous hyperemia, stasis, spasm of  arterioles, arterial hyperemia, prestasis
*c. Spasm of arterioles, arterial hyperemia, venous hyperemia, prestasis, stasis
d. Prestasis, stasis, spasm of arterioles,  arterial hyperemia, venous hyperemia
e. Arterial hyperemia, venous hyperemia, prestasis, stasis, spasm of arterioles
1402. During a preoperative examination, prothrombin deficiency was detected in the patient's blood. What must be prescribed in this case in advance to reduce the blood loss during the surgery?
*a. Vicasol (Menadione)
b. Contrykal (Aprotinin)
c. Aminocaproic acid
d. Phenylin (Phenindione)
e. Thrombin
1403. During a preoperative examination, prothrombin deficiency was detected in the patient's blood. What must be prescribed in this case in advance to reduce the blood loss during the surgery?
a. Thrombin
b. Aminocaproic acid
c. Contrykal (Aprotinin)
*d. Vicasol (Menadione)
e. Phenylin (Phenindione)
1404. During a preoperative examination, prothrombin deficiency was detected in the patient's blood. What must be prescribed in this case in advance to reduce the blood loss during the surgery?
a. Thrombin
b. Contrykal (Aprotinin)
c. Aminocaproic acid
d. Phenylin (Phenindione)
*e. Vicasol (Menadione)
1405. During a surgery, narcosis overdose caused signs of acute hypoxia, indicated by increased heart rate of 124/min. and tachypnea. What type of hypoxia is observed in this case?
a. Circulatory
b. Hypoxic
*c. Respiratory
d. Tissue
e. Mixed
1406. During a surgery, narcosis overdose caused signs of acute hypoxia, indicated by increased heart rate of 124/min. and tachypnea. What type of hypoxia is observed in this case?
a. Mixed
b. Tissue
*c. Respiratory
d. Circulatory
e. Hypoxic
1407. During a surgery, narcosis overdose caused signs of acute hypoxia, indicated by increased heart rate of 124/min. and tachypnea. What type of hypoxia is observed in this case?
a. Tissue
b. Mixed
c. Circulatory
*d. Respiratory
e. Hypoxic
1408. During a surgery, tubocurarin chloride was used as a muscle relaxant. What antagonist should the patient be given to restore spontaneous breathing?
*a. Proserin (Neostigmine)
b. Cytitone (Cytisine)
c. Benzohexonium (Hexamethonium)
d. Dithylin (Suxamethonium)
e. Aethimizole (Methylamide)
1409. During a surgery, tubocurarin chloride was used as a muscle relaxant. What antagonist should the patient be given to restore spontaneous breathing?
a. Aethimizole (Methylamide)
*b. Proserin (Neostigmine)
c. Cytitone (Cytisine)
d. Dithylin (Suxamethonium)
e. Benzohexonium (Hexamethonium)
1410. During a surgery, tubocurarin chloride was used as a muscle relaxant. What antagonist should the patient be given to restore spontaneous breathing?
a. Benzohexonium (Hexamethonium)
*b. Proserin (Neostigmine)
c. Dithylin (Suxamethonium)
d. Aethimizole (Methylamide)
e. Cytitone (Cytisine)
1411. During absolute starvation, the body uses endogenous water. What substance is the source of endogenous water in the human body?
*a. Fats
b. Cellulose
c. Glycogen
d. Proteoglycans
e. Proteins
1412. During absolute starvation, the body uses endogenous water. What substance is the source of endogenous water in the human body?
*a. Fats
b. Glycogen
c. Proteoglycans
d. Cellulose
e. Proteins
1413. During absolute starvation, the body uses endogenous water. What substance is the source of endogenous water in the human body?
a. Glycogen
b. Cellulose
*c. Fats
d. Proteins
e. Proteoglycans
1414. During active muscle work, anaerobic glycolysis is the main source of energy, causing the accumulation of lactate in the muscles, the level of which gradually decreases. During what interorgan cycle does the utilization of lactate take place afterwards?
*a. Cori cycle
b. Urea cycle
c. Knoop-Lynen cycle
d. Pentose phosphate cycle
e. Krebs cycle
1415. During active muscle work, anaerobic glycolysis is the main source of energy, causing the accumulation of lactate in the muscles, the level of which gradually decreases. During what interorgan cycle does the utilization of lactate take place afterwards?
a. Pentose phosphate cycle
*b. Cori cycle
c. Urea cycle
d. Knoop-Lynen cycle
e. Krebs cycle
1416. During active muscle work, anaerobic glycolysis is the main source of energy, causing the accumulation of lactate in the muscles, the level of which gradually decreases. During what interorgan cycle does the utilization of lactate take place afterwards?
a. Pentose phosphate cycle
b. Knoop-Lynen cycle
c. Urea cycle
d. Krebs cycle
*e. Cori cycle
1417. During anaerobic glycolysis, ATP synthesis occurs by means of substrate phosphorylation that uses the energy of other macroergic compounds. Name one such compound:
*a. Phosphoenolpyruvate
b. Glucose
c. Glucose-6-phosphate
d. Lactate
e. Pyruvate
1418. During anaerobic glycolysis, ATP synthesis occurs by means of substrate phosphorylation that uses the energy of other macroergic compounds. Name one such compound:
*a. Phosphoenolpyruvate
b. Lactate
c. Pyruvate
d. Glucose-6-phosphate
e. Glucose
1419. During anaerobic glycolysis, ATP synthesis occurs by means of substrate phosphorylation that uses the energy of other macroergic compounds. Name one such compound:
a. Lactate
*b. Phosphoenolpyruvate
c. Glucose-6-phosphate
d. Pyruvate
e. Glucose
1420. During analysis of a herbal raw material, a culture was grown on a nutrient medium. The culture looks like a black furry plaque. Unseptated mycelial filaments with spherical thickenings at their ends were found in the smear preparations. Name these microorganisms:
a. Actinomyces
b. Candida
c. Penicillium
*d. Mucor
e. Aspergillus
1421. During analysis of a herbal raw material, a culture was grown on a nutrient medium. The culture looks like a black furry plaque. Unseptated mycelial filaments with spherical thickenings at their ends were found in the smear preparations. Name these microorganisms:
a. Aspergillus
b. Penicillium
c. Candida
*d. Mucor
e. Actinomyces
1422. During examination a woman presents with enlarged thyroid gland, exophthalmos, increased basal metabolism and heat production, tachycardia, tearfulness, and nervousness. This clinical presentation is characteristic of the following disease:
a. Addison's disease
*b. Thyrotoxicosis
c. Hypothyroidism
d. Diabetes mellitus
e. Cushing's disease
1423. During examination a woman presents with enlarged thyroid gland, exophthalmos, increased basal metabolism and heat production, tachycardia, tearfulness, and nervousness. This clinical presentation is characteristic of the following disease:
a. Diabetes mellitus
b. Addison's disease
c. Cushing's disease
d. Hypothyroidism
*e. Thyrotoxicosis
1424. During examination a woman presents with enlarged thyroid gland, exophthalmos, increased basal metabolism and heat production, tachycardia, tearfulness, and nervousness. This clinical presentation is characteristic of the following disease:
a. Diabetes mellitus
b. Cushing's disease
c. Hypothyroidism
*d. Thyrotoxicosis
e. Addison's disease
1425. During examination of a patient the otolaryngologist noted that the patient's tonsils are extremely swollen, hyperemic, and have gray coating. Microscopy of the coating sample detects there gram-positive bacilli arranged at an angle to each other. What disease can be suspected?
a. Meningococcal nasopharyngitis
*b. Diphtheria
c. Mumps
d. Scarlet fever
e. Tonsillitis
1426. During examination of a patient the otolaryngologist noted that the patient's tonsils are extremely swollen, hyperemic, and have gray coating. Microscopy of the coating sample detects there gram-positive bacilli arranged at an angle to each other. What disease can be suspected?
a. Tonsillitis
b. Mumps
c. Meningococcal nasopharyngitis
*d. Diphtheria
e. Scarlet fever
1427. During examination of a patient the otolaryngologist noted that the patient's tonsils are extremely swollen, hyperemic, and have gray coating. Microscopy of the coating sample detects there gram-positive bacilli arranged at an angle to each other. What disease can be suspected?
a. Tonsillitis
b. Scarlet fever
*c. Diphtheria
d. Meningococcal nasopharyngitis
e. Mumps
1428. During feces analysis of a 3-month-old child with signs of enteric infection, numerous dark-red colonies have grown on Endo agar. What microorganisms can be the causative agents of this enteric infection?
a. Gonococci
b. Salmonellae
*c. Escherichia
d. Shigella
e. Streptococci
1429. During feces analysis of a 3-month-old child with signs of enteric infection, numerous dark-red colonies have grown on Endo agar. What microorganisms can be the causative agents of this enteric infection?
a. Salmonellae
b. Gonococci
c. Streptococci
*d. Escherichia
e. Shigella
1430. During feces analysis of a 3-month-old child with signs of enteric infection, numerous dark-red colonies have grown on Endo agar. What microorganisms can be the causative agents of this enteric infection?
a. Streptococci
b. Gonococci
c. Salmonellae
*d. Escherichia
e. Shigella
1431. During furosemide therapy of a patient with chronic edematous syndrome, his plasma-cation concentration was disturbed. What drug should be used in this case?
*a. Potassium chloride
b. Thiamine bromide
c. Ascorutin (Ascorbic acid + Rutoside)
d. Aspirin
e. Magne B_6
1432. During furosemide therapy of a patient with chronic edematous syndrome, his plasma-cation concentration was disturbed. What drug should be used in this case?
a. Ascorutin (Ascorbic acid + Rutoside)
b. Thiamine bromide
c. Aspirin
d. Magne B_6
*e. Potassium chloride
1433. During furosemide therapy of a patient with chronic edematous syndrome, his plasma-cation concentration was disturbed. What drug should be used in this case?
a. Magne B_6
*b. Potassium chloride
c. Thiamine bromide
d. Ascorutin (Ascorbic acid + Rutoside)
e. Aspirin
1434. During harvesting herbal raw materials, a marked mosaicism was noticed on the leaves of medicinal plants. What microorganisms cause this disease?
a. Bacteria
b. Protozoa
*c. Viruses
d. Microscopic fungi
e. Viroids
1435. During harvesting herbal raw materials, a marked mosaicism was noticed on the leaves of medicinal plants. What microorganisms cause this disease?
a. Protozoa
b. Microscopic fungi
c. Bacteria
*d. Viruses
e. Viroids
1436. During harvesting herbal raw materials, a marked mosaicism was noticed on the leaves of medicinal plants. What microorganisms cause this disease?
a. Viroids
b. Bacteria
*c. Viruses
d. Microscopic fungi
e. Protozoa
1437. During invasive surgery with muscle relaxant applied a patient developed breathing disruption that was normalised by administering proserin. How can this drug interaction be described?
a. Cumulation
b. Tachyphylaxis
c. Synergism
d. Incompatibility
*e. Antagonism
1438. During invasive surgery with muscle relaxant applied a patient developed breathing disruption that was normalised by administering proserin. How can this drug interaction be described?
a. Incompatibility
*b. Antagonism
c. Tachyphylaxis
d. Synergism
e. Cumulation
1439. During invasive surgery with muscle relaxant applied a patient developed breathing disruption that was normalised by administering proserin. How can this drug interaction be described?
a. Synergism
b. Tachyphylaxis
c. Cumulation
d. Incompatibility
*e. Antagonism
1440. During long-term carbon tetrachloride poisoning of animals significant activity drop of aminoacyl tRNA synthetase in hepatocytes was detected. What metabolic process is disrupted in this case?
*a. Protein biosynthesis
b. RNA transcription
c. DNA replication
d. Post-transcriptional modification of RNA
e. Post-translational modification of peptides
1441. During long-term carbon tetrachloride poisoning of animals significant activity drop of aminoacyl tRNA synthetase in hepatocytes was detected. What metabolic process is disrupted in this case?
a. DNA replication
b. Post-transcriptional modification of RNA
*c. Protein biosynthesis
d. Post-translational modification of peptides
e. RNA transcription
1442. During long-term carbon tetrachloride poisoning of animals significant activity drop of aminoacyl tRNA synthetase in hepatocytes was detected. What metabolic process is disrupted in this case?
a. Post-transcriptional modification of RNA
b. Post-translational modification of peptides
*c. Protein biosynthesis
d. DNA replication
e. RNA transcription
1443. During morphological description of common periwinkle it was defined that it has shoot that trails on the ground and takes root. It allows to chatacterize such shoot as:
*a. Creeping
b. Tenent
c. Scandent
d. Recumbent
e. Twining
1444. During morphological description of common periwinkle it was defined that it has shoot that trails on the ground and takes root. It allows to chatacterize such shoot as:
a. Tenent
*b. Creeping
c. Recumbent
d. Scandent
e. Twining
1445. During morphological description of common periwinkle it was defined that it has shoot that trails on the ground and takes root. It allows to chatacterize such shoot as:
a. Twining
*b. Creeping
c. Scandent
d. Recumbent
e. Tenent
1446. During practical field session students have detected plant with diversity of leaves that differ by their placement on stem, parts development, size, shape, lamina division. This phenomenon is called:
*a. Heterophylly
b. Leaf mosaic
c. Venation
d. Phyllotaxy
e. Metamorphosis
1447. During practical field session students have detected plant with diversity of leaves that differ by their placement on stem, parts development, size, shape, lamina division. This phenomenon is called:
a. Leaf mosaic
*b. Heterophylly
c. Phyllotaxy
d. Metamorphosis
e. Venation
1448. During practical field session students have detected plant with diversity of leaves that differ by their placement on stem, parts development, size, shape, lamina division. This phenomenon is called:
a. Phyllotaxy
b. Venation
c. Leaf mosaic
d. Metamorphosis
*e. Heterophylly
1449. During skill building session in the field of microbiology, a student performed inoculation of microorganisms into the solid nutrient medium to obtain isolated colonies. How should inoculation loops be sterilized after that?
*a. Heating in the burner flame
b. Soaking in 1% chloramine-B solution
c. Formaldehyde vapor sterilization
d. Dry heat sterilization under 160^oC for 120-150 minutes
e. Boiling under 60^oC five times
1450. During skill building session in the field of microbiology, a student performed inoculation of microorganisms into the solid nutrient medium to obtain isolated colonies. How should inoculation loops be sterilized after that?
a. Formaldehyde vapor sterilization
b. Dry heat sterilization under 160^oC for 120-150 minutes
*c. Heating in the burner flame
d. Boiling under 60^oC five times
e. Soaking in 1% chloramine-B solution
1451. During skill building session in the field of microbiology, a student performed inoculation of microorganisms into the solid nutrient medium to obtain isolated colonies. How should inoculation loops be sterilized after that?
a. Formaldehyde vapor sterilization
b. Dry heat sterilization under 160^oC for 120-150 minutes
c. Soaking in 1% chloramine-B solution
*d. Heating in the burner flame
e. Boiling under 60^oC five times
1452. During the microbiological diagnostics of syphilis, it became necessary to study the nature and degree of mobility of the causative agent. What type of microscopy is used for this purpose at a bacteriological laboratory?
a. Electron microscopy
b. Fluorescent microscopy
*c. Dark-field microscopy
d. Light-field microscopy
e. X-ray microscopy
1453. During the microbiological diagnostics of syphilis, it became necessary to study the nature and degree of mobility of the causative agent. What type of microscopy is used for this purpose at a bacteriological laboratory?
a. Light-field microscopy
b. Electron microscopy
c. X-ray microscopy
d. Fluorescent microscopy
*e. Dark-field microscopy
1454. During the microbiological diagnostics of syphilis, it became necessary to study the nature and degree of mobility of the causative agent. What type of microscopy is used for this purpose at a bacteriological laboratory?
a. Light-field microscopy
b. Fluorescent microscopy
*c. Dark-field microscopy
d. X-ray microscopy
e. Electron microscopy
1455. During the morphological analysis of a flower, the presence of a reduced perianth in the form of two membranes - lodicules - was established. Its stamens have long staminal filaments. Its pistil has a feathery stigma. This description is characteristic of the plants that belong to the following family:
a. Alliaceae
b. Pinaceae
c. Convallariaceae
*d. Poaceae
e. Lamiaceae
1456. During the morphological analysis of a flower, the presence of a reduced perianth in the form of two membranes - lodicules - was established. Its stamens have long staminal filaments. Its pistil has a feathery stigma. This description is characteristic of the plants that belong to the following family:
a. Convallariaceae
b. Alliaceae
c. Lamiaceae
d. Pinaceae
*e. Poaceae
1457. During the morphological analysis of a flower, the presence of a reduced perianth in the form of two membranes - lodicules - was established. Its stamens have long staminal filaments. Its pistil has a feathery stigma. This description is characteristic of the plants that belong to the following family:
a. Convallariaceae
b. Alliaceae
c. Pinaceae
*d. Poaceae
e. Lamiaceae
1458. During the study of home-made canned vegetables, microorganisms that resemble a tennis racket were inoculated on the Kitt-Tarozzi medium. What disease is likely to be caused by these pathogens?
*a. Botulism
b. Escherichiosis
c. Shigellosis
d. Cholera
e. Salmonellosis
1459. During the study of home-made canned vegetables, microorganisms that resemble a tennis racket were inoculated on the Kitt-Tarozzi medium. What disease is likely to be caused by these pathogens?
a. Shigellosis
*b. Botulism
c. Cholera
d. Salmonellosis
e. Escherichiosis
1460. During the study of home-made canned vegetables, microorganisms that resemble a tennis racket were inoculated on the Kitt-Tarozzi medium. What disease is likely to be caused by these pathogens?
a. Shigellosis
*b. Botulism
c. Escherichiosis
d. Salmonellosis
e. Cholera
1461. During ultrasound investigation a patient was diagnosed with bilateral renal artery stenosis of atherosclerotic genesis. Specify the bioactive substance that due to its excessive secretion is the key component of arterial hypertension pathogenesis in the given case:
a. Noradrenaline
b. Cortisol
c. Thyroxin
*d. Renin
e. Vasopressin
1462. During ultrasound investigation a patient was diagnosed with bilateral renal artery stenosis of atherosclerotic genesis. Specify the bioactive substance that due to its excessive secretion is the key component of arterial hypertension pathogenesis in the given case:
a. Noradrenaline
b. Thyroxin
c. Cortisol
d. Vasopressin
*e. Renin
1463. During ultrasound investigation a patient was diagnosed with bilateral renal artery stenosis of atherosclerotic genesis. Specify the bioactive substance that due to its excessive secretion is the key component of arterial hypertension pathogenesis in the given case:
a. Vasopressin
b. Thyroxin
c. Cortisol
d. Noradrenaline
*e. Renin
1464. During what process does the entropy of a system decrease?
*a. Polymerization
b. Sublimation
c. Evaporation
d. Dissolution
e. Dissociation
1465. During what process does the entropy of a system decrease?
a. Evaporation
b. Sublimation
c. Dissolution
d. Dissociation
*e. Polymerization
1466. During what process does the entropy of a system decrease?
a. Sublimation
b. Evaporation
*c. Polymerization
d. Dissolution
e. Dissociation
1467. Dysbiosis can be treated with drugs that contain living representatives of normal microflora as well as their metabolic products. Select the microorganisms that are used for the production of such drugs:
*a. Bifidus bacteria
b. Yersinia
c. Staphylococcus aureus
d. Proteus
e. Providencia
1468. Dysbiosis can be treated with drugs that contain living representatives of normal microflora as well as their metabolic products. Select the microorganisms that are used for the production of such drugs:
a. Providencia
b. Staphylococcus aureus
c. Yersinia
*d. Bifidus bacteria
e. Proteus
1469. Dysbiosis can be treated with drugs that contain living representatives of normal microflora as well as their metabolic products. Select the microorganisms that are used for the production of such drugs:
a. Providencia
b. Yersinia
*c. Bifidus bacteria
d. Staphylococcus aureus
e. Proteus
1470. Each stem node of white deadnettle (Lamium album) has two leaves that grow perpendicularly to the leaves of the previous node. Such leaf arrangement is called:
a. Spiral
b. Verticillate
*c. Cross-opposite
d. Leaf mosaic
e. Rosette
1471. Each stem node of white deadnettle (Lamium album) has two leaves that grow perpendicularly to the leaves of the previous node. Such leaf arrangement is called:
a. Spiral
b. Verticillate
c. Rosette
*d. Cross-opposite
e. Leaf mosaic
1472. Each stem node of white deadnettle (Lamium album) has two leaves that grow perpendicularly to the leaves of the previous node. Such leaf arrangement is called:
a. Verticillate
*b. Cross-opposite
c. Spiral
d. Rosette
e. Leaf mosaic
1473. Electrokinetic potential is a parameter that measures the charge of proteins, leukocytes, and erythrocytes. At what interface is the electrokinetic potential generated?
a. Core-adsorption layer
*b. Granule-diffuse layer
c. Core-diffuse layer
d. Micelle-dispersion medium
e. Aggregate-potential-determining ions
1474. Electrokinetic potential is a parameter that measures the charge of proteins, leukocytes, and erythrocytes. At what interface is the electrokinetic potential generated?
a. Core-adsorption layer
b. Core-diffuse layer
c. Micelle-dispersion medium
*d. Granule-diffuse layer
e. Aggregate-potential-determining ions
1475. Electrokinetic potential is a parameter that measures the charge of proteins, leukocytes, and erythrocytes. At what interface is the electrokinetic potential generated?
a. Micelle-dispersion medium
*b. Granule-diffuse layer
c. Core-adsorption layer
d. Aggregate-potential-determining ions
e. Core-diffuse layer
1476. Electrolytic dissociation is one of the quantitative characteristics of electrolytes. What is used to determine the degree of electrolytic dissociation?
*a. The ratio of the number of dissociated molecules to the total number of solute molecules
b. The product of the number of dissociated and non-dissociated solute molecules
c. The ratio of the solution concentration to the total number of dissociated solute molecules
d. The ratio of the number of non-dissociated solute molecules to the total number of ions
e. The ratio of the number of non-dissociated molecules to the number of dissociated solute molecules
1477. Electrolytic dissociation is one of the quantitative characteristics of electrolytes. What is used to determine the degree of electrolytic dissociation?
*a. The ratio of the number of dissociated molecules to the total number of solute molecules
b. The ratio of the number of non-dissociated solute molecules to the total number of ions
c. The ratio of the number of non-dissociated molecules to the number of dissociated solute molecules
d. The ratio of the solution concentration to the total number of dissociated solute molecules
e. The product of the number of dissociated and non-dissociated solute molecules
1478. Electrolytic dissociation is one of the quantitative characteristics of electrolytes. What is used to determine the degree of electrolytic dissociation?
a. The ratio of the solution concentration to the total number of dissociated solute molecules
b. The ratio of the number of non-dissociated molecules to the number of dissociated solute molecules
*c. The ratio of the number of dissociated molecules to the total number of solute molecules
d. The ratio of the number of non-dissociated solute molecules to the total number of ions
e. The product of the number of dissociated and non-dissociated solute molecules
1479. Emulsions are classified according to the volume concentration of dispersed phase. An emulsion with the concentration at the rate of 0,1-74,0% vol. relates to the following group of emulsions:
a. Direct
b. Diluted
c. Highly concentrated
d. Reversible
*e. Concentrated
1480. Emulsions are classified according to the volume concentration of dispersed phase. An emulsion with the concentration at the rate of 0,1-74,0% vol. relates to the following group of emulsions:
a. Reversible
b. Diluted
*c. Concentrated
d. Highly concentrated
e. Direct
1481. Emulsions are classified according to the volume concentration of dispersed phase. An emulsion with the concentration at the rate of 0,1-74,0% vol. relates to the following group of emulsions:
a. Reversible
b. Diluted
c. Highly concentrated
*d. Concentrated
e. Direct
1482. Emulsions are thermodynamically unstable. In them, the droplets of dispersed phase merge together spontaneously, causing the emulsion to stratify. Name this phenomenon:
a. Contraction
b. Deformation
c. Solubilization
d. Wetting
*e. Coalescence
1483. Emulsions are thermodynamically unstable. In them, the droplets of dispersed phase merge together spontaneously, causing the emulsion to stratify. Name this phenomenon:
a. Solubilization
b. Deformation
*c. Coalescence
d. Contraction
e. Wetting
1484. Emulsions are thermodynamically unstable. In them, the droplets of dispersed phase merge together spontaneously, causing the emulsion to stratify. Name this phenomenon:
a. Solubilization
b. Wetting
c. Contraction
d. Deformation
*e. Coalescence
1485. Emulsions containing less then 0,1% of dispersed phase (in volume) are classified as:
a. Concentrated
b. Water-in-oil type
c. Oil-in-water type
*d. Diluted
e. High-concentration
1486. Emulsions containing less then 0,1% of dispersed phase (in volume) are classified as:
a. High-concentration
*b. Diluted
c. Water-in-oil type
d. Oil-in-water type
e. Concentrated
1487. Emulsions containing less then 0,1% of dispersed phase (in volume) are classified as:
a. High-concentration
b. Oil-in-water type
c. Concentrated
d. Water-in-oil type
*e. Diluted
1488. Emulsions, ointments, pastes, etc., can be made by comminuting solids and liquids in a suitable medium. This process is called:
*a. Dispersion
b. Condensation
c. Adhesion
d. Coagulation
e. Sedimentation
1489. Emulsions, ointments, pastes, etc., can be made by comminuting solids and liquids in a suitable medium. This process is called:
a. Adhesion
b. Sedimentation
c. Coagulation
*d. Dispersion
e. Condensation
1490. Emulsions, ointments, pastes, etc., can be made by comminuting solids and liquids in a suitable medium. This process is called:
a. Condensation
b. Adhesion
*c. Dispersion
d. Sedimentation
e. Coagulation
1491. Endocrinological analysis detects growth hormone deficiency in a schoolboy. What pathology can develop in the child?
a. Acromegaly
*b. Pituitary nanism
c. Pituitary cachexia
d. Pituitary gigantism
e. Adiposogenital dystrophy
1492. Endocrinological analysis detects growth hormone deficiency in a schoolboy. What pathology can develop in the child?
a. Adiposogenital dystrophy
*b. Pituitary nanism
c. Pituitary gigantism
d. Acromegaly
e. Pituitary cachexia
1493. Endocrinological analysis detects growth hormone deficiency in a schoolboy. What pathology can develop in the child?
a. Pituitary gigantism
b. Acromegaly
*c. Pituitary nanism
d. Pituitary cachexia
e. Adiposogenital dystrophy
1494. Enteral lipid metabolism is possible only under a certain set of conditions. What substance of those named below provides for emulsification of lipids, activation of lipase and absorption of fatty acids?
a. Amino acids
*b. Bile acid
c. Hydrochloric acid
d. Cholesterol
e. Glucose
1495. Enteral lipid metabolism is possible only under a certain set of conditions. What substance of those named below provides for emulsification of lipids, activation of lipase and absorption of fatty acids?
a. Amino acids
b. Glucose
*c. Bile acid
d. Hydrochloric acid
e. Cholesterol
1496. Enteral lipid metabolism is possible only under a certain set of conditions. What substance of those named below provides for emulsification of lipids, activation of lipase and absorption of fatty acids?
a. Hydrochloric acid
b. Glucose
c. Cholesterol
*d. Bile acid
e. Amino acids
1497. Entropy, as one of the main thermodynamic functions, is a measure of:
a. Enthalpy
b. Energy that can be used to perform  work
c. Total energy of a system
d. Internal energy of a system
*e. Dissipated energy
1498. Entropy, as one of the main thermodynamic functions, is a measure of:
a. Internal energy of a system
*b. Dissipated energy
c. Energy that can be used to perform  work
d. Total energy of a system
e. Enthalpy
1499. Entropy, as one of the main thermodynamic functions, is a measure of:
a. Internal energy of a system
b. Enthalpy
c. Energy that can be used to perform  work
d. Total energy of a system
*e. Dissipated energy
1500. Enzyme activity is measured to diagnose diseases of the pancreas. What enzyme must be used in acute pancreatitis?
a. Aldolase
b. Deoxyribonuclease
c. Ribonuclease
d. Alanine aminotransferase
*e. Amylase
1501. Enzyme activity is measured to diagnose diseases of the pancreas. What enzyme must be used in acute pancreatitis?
a. Deoxyribonuclease
b. Alanine aminotransferase
c. Aldolase
d. Ribonuclease
*e. Amylase
1502. Enzyme activity is measured to diagnose diseases of the pancreas. What enzyme must be used in acute pancreatitis?
a. Ribonuclease
b. Aldolase
c. Alanine aminotransferase
*d. Amylase
e. Deoxyribonuclease
1503. Enzymes accelerate biochemical reactions by over 10^8 times. What equation describes the rate of enzymatic catalysis?
*a. Michaelis-Menten equation
b. Law of mass action
c. Arrhenius equation
d. Van't Hoff equation
e. Van't Hoff isotherm equation
1504. Enzymes accelerate biochemical reactions by over 10^8 times. What equation describes the rate of enzymatic catalysis?
a. Arrhenius equation
b. Van't Hoff isotherm equation
c. Law of mass action
d. Van't Hoff equation
*e. Michaelis-Menten equation
1505. Enzymes accelerate biochemical reactions by over 10^8 times. What equation describes the rate of enzymatic catalysis?
a. Law of mass action
b. Arrhenius equation
c. Van't Hoff equation
d. Van't Hoff isotherm equation
*e. Michaelis-Menten equation
1506. Enzymes accelerate biochemical reactions, making them occur more than 10^8 times faster. What equation describes the rate of enzyme catalysis?
a. Arrhenius equation
b. Van't Hoff equation
*c. Michaelis-Menten equation
d. Law of mass action
e. Van't Hoff reaction isotherm
1507. Enzymes accelerate biochemical reactions, making them occur more than 10^8 times faster. What equation describes the rate of enzyme catalysis?
a. Arrhenius equation
b. Van't Hoff reaction isotherm
c. Van't Hoff equation
*d. Michaelis-Menten equation
e. Law of mass action
1508. Enzymes accelerate biochemical reactions, making them occur more than 10^8 times faster. What equation describes the rate of enzyme catalysis?
a. Van't Hoff equation
b. Law of mass action
c. Van't Hoff reaction isotherm
*d. Michaelis-Menten equation
e. Arrhenius equation
1509. Enzymes are widely used as drugs in pharmacy. What is the main feature that separates enzymes from non-biological catalysts?
*a. High specificity and selectivity
b. Low universality
c. High dispersion
d. High homogeneity
e. High universality
1510. Enzymes are widely used as drugs in pharmacy. What is the main feature that separates enzymes from non-biological catalysts?
a. High universality
b. Low universality
c. High dispersion
d. High homogeneity
*e. High specificity and selectivity
1511. Enzymes are widely used as drugs in pharmacy. What is the main feature that separates enzymes from non-biological catalysts?
a. Low universality
b. High universality
c. High dispersion
d. High homogeneity
*e. High specificity and selectivity
1512. Essential oils are used both in pharmaceutical and cosmetic industry. To extract essential oils from herbal raw material, the following technology is used:
*a. Steam distillation
b. Calorimetry
c. Conductometry
d. Potentiometry
e. Colorimetry
1513. Essential oils are used both in pharmaceutical and cosmetic industry. To extract essential oils from herbal raw material, the following technology is used:
a. Calorimetry
b. Conductometry
*c. Steam distillation
d. Colorimetry
e. Potentiometry
1514. Essential oils are used both in pharmaceutical and cosmetic industry. To extract essential oils from herbal raw material, the following technology is used:
a. Potentiometry
b. Colorimetry
c. Calorimetry
d. Conductometry
*e. Steam distillation
1515. Etiological factors of infectious diseases can be infectious agents with diverse ultrastructure. Which of the following groups does textbfNOT have cellular structure, protein synthesis, enzymatic and energy systems?
*a. Viruses
b. Rickettsia
c. Protozoa
d. Fungi
e. Bacteria
1516. Etiological factors of infectious diseases can be infectious agents with diverse ultrastructure. Which of the following groups does textbfNOT have cellular structure, protein synthesis, enzymatic and energy systems?
a. Bacteria
*b. Viruses
c. Rickettsia
d. Fungi
e. Protozoa
1517. Etiological factors of infectious diseases can be infectious agents with diverse ultrastructure. Which of the following groups does textbfNOT have cellular structure, protein synthesis, enzymatic and energy systems?
a. Fungi
b. Rickettsia
c. Protozoa
*d. Viruses
e. Bacteria
1518. Every year in autumn a coniferous tree from the Gymnospermae subdivision undergoes defoliation of its soft needles situated on short shoots. It is characteristic of the following genus:
*a. Larix
b. Picea
c. Pinus
d. Abies
e. Cedrus
1519. Every year in autumn a coniferous tree from the Gymnospermae subdivision undergoes defoliation of its soft needles situated on short shoots. It is characteristic of the following genus:
a. Abies
b. Picea
c. Cedrus
*d. Larix
e. Pinus
1520. Every year in autumn a coniferous tree from the Gymnospermae subdivision undergoes defoliation of its soft needles situated on short shoots. It is characteristic of the following genus:
a. Picea
b. Abies
c. Cedrus
*d. Larix
e. Pinus
1521. Examination of a 45-year-old man, who for a long time kept to a vegetarian plant-based diet, revealed him to have negative nitrogen balance. What peculiarity of his diet has caused such developments?
a. Excessive carbohydrate content
b. Insufficient fat content
*c. Insufficient protein content
d. Excessive water content
e. Insufficient vitamin content
1522. Examination of a 45-year-old man, who for a long time kept to a vegetarian plant-based diet, revealed him to have negative nitrogen balance. What peculiarity of his diet has caused such developments?
a. Insufficient fat content
*b. Insufficient protein content
c. Excessive water content
d. Insufficient vitamin content
e. Excessive carbohydrate content
1523. Examination of a 45-year-old man, who for a long time kept to a vegetarian plant-based diet, revealed him to have negative nitrogen balance. What peculiarity of his diet has caused such developments?
a. Insufficient vitamin content
b. Excessive carbohydrate content
*c. Insufficient protein content
d. Excessive water content
e. Insufficient fat content
1524. Examination of a child revealed enlarged abdomen, curved legs, increased excitability of the nervous system, and increased excretion of phosphates with the urine. Deficiency of what food component can cause such clinical changes?
*a. Vitamin D
b. Vitamin K
c. Vitamin A
d. Vitamin F
e. Vitamin C
1525. Examination of a child revealed enlarged abdomen, curved legs, increased excitability of the nervous system, and increased excretion of phosphates with the urine. Deficiency of what food component can cause such clinical changes?
a. Vitamin A
b. Vitamin C
*c. Vitamin D
d. Vitamin F
e. Vitamin K
1526. Examination of a child revealed enlarged abdomen, curved legs, increased excitability of the nervous system, and increased excretion of phosphates with the urine. Deficiency of what food component can cause such clinical changes?
a. Vitamin K
b. Vitamin C
c. Vitamin F
d. Vitamin A
*e. Vitamin D
1527. Examination of a patient by a neurologist has detected the presence of ataxia in the patient. What signs are characteristic of this nervous system disorder?
a. Impaired initiation and planning of  movements
*b. Impaired temporal and spatial  movement orientation
c. No movements in one half of the torso
d. Excessive movements
e. No movements in the upper limbs
1528. Examination of a patient by a neurologist has detected the presence of ataxia in the patient. What signs are characteristic of this nervous system disorder?
a. Impaired initiation and planning of  movements
b. No movements in the upper limbs
c. No movements in one half of the torso
d. Excessive movements
*e. Impaired temporal and spatial  movement orientation
1529. Examination of a patient by a neurologist has detected the presence of ataxia in the patient. What signs are characteristic of this nervous system disorder?
a. No movements in one half of the torso
b. No movements in the upper limbs
c. Excessive movements
*d. Impaired temporal and spatial  movement orientation
e. Impaired initiation and planning of  movements
1530. Examination of a patient detects excessive growth of bones and soft tissues of the face, enlarged tongue and internal organs, and widened interdental spaces. The patient's condition could have been caused by increased secretion of a certain hormone. Name this hormone.
a. Adrenaline
b. Vasopressin
c. Thyroxine
*d. Somatotropin
e. Prolactin
1531. Examination of a patient detects excessive growth of bones and soft tissues of the face, enlarged tongue and internal organs, and widened interdental spaces. The patient's condition could have been caused by increased secretion of a certain hormone. Name this hormone.
a. Thyroxine
b. Adrenaline
*c. Somatotropin
d. Vasopressin
e. Prolactin
1532. Examination of a patient detects excessive growth of bones and soft tissues of the face, enlarged tongue and internal organs, and widened interdental spaces. The patient's condition could have been caused by increased secretion of a certain hormone. Name this hormone.
a. Vasopressin
*b. Somatotropin
c. Thyroxine
d. Prolactin
e. Adrenaline
1533. Examination of a sputum sample obtained from a patient provisionally diagnosed with tuberculosis revealed thin, long, slightly curved, rod-shaped microorganisms in the specimen. The microorganisms were stained ruby-red and arranged in strands. What staining method was used in this case?
a. Gram
b. Ozheshko
*c. Ziehl-Neelsen
d. Romanowsky-Giemsa
e. Loeffler
1534. Examination of a sputum sample obtained from a patient provisionally diagnosed with tuberculosis revealed thin, long, slightly curved, rod-shaped microorganisms in the specimen. The microorganisms were stained ruby-red and arranged in strands. What staining method was used in this case?
a. Romanowsky-Giemsa
*b. Ziehl-Neelsen
c. Loeffler
d. Gram
e. Ozheshko
1535. Examination of a sputum sample obtained from a patient provisionally diagnosed with tuberculosis revealed thin, long, slightly curved, rod-shaped microorganisms in the specimen. The microorganisms were stained ruby-red and arranged in strands. What staining method was used in this case?
a. Romanowsky-Giemsa
b. Gram
c. Loeffler
*d. Ziehl-Neelsen
e. Ozheshko
1536. Examination of an underground organ of Poligonatum odoratum shows that it is horizontally oriented, uniformly thick and has nodes, internodes, round indentations, and an apical bud. Therefore, it is a:
a. Main root
*b. Rhizome
c. Root crop
d. Underground stolon
e. Root tuber
1537. Examination of an underground organ of Poligonatum odoratum shows that it is horizontally oriented, uniformly thick and has nodes, internodes, round indentations, and an apical bud. Therefore, it is a:
a. Root crop
*b. Rhizome
c. Underground stolon
d. Root tuber
e. Main root
1538. Examination of an underground organ of Poligonatum odoratum shows that it is horizontally oriented, uniformly thick and has nodes, internodes, round indentations, and an apical bud. Therefore, it is a:
a. Underground stolon
*b. Rhizome
c. Root tuber
d. Main root
e. Root crop
1539. Examination of children with kwashiorkor revealed facial edema, ascites, weight loss, and stunted growth. What is the most likely cause of this disease?
a. Carbohydrate deficiency
b. Excess protein in the diet
*c. Alimentary protein deficiency
d. Excess fats and carbohydrates
e. Deficiency of unsaturated fatty acids
1540. Examination of children with kwashiorkor revealed facial edema, ascites, weight loss, and stunted growth. What is the most likely cause of this disease?
a. Carbohydrate deficiency
b. Excess protein in the diet
c. Excess fats and carbohydrates
*d. Alimentary protein deficiency
e. Deficiency of unsaturated fatty acids
1541. Examination of children with kwashiorkor revealed facial edema, ascites, weight loss, and stunted growth. What is the most likely cause of this disease?
a. Deficiency of unsaturated fatty acids
b. Carbohydrate deficiency
c. Excess fats and carbohydrates
*d. Alimentary protein deficiency
e. Excess protein in the diet
1542. Examination of the lower limbs of a 40-year-old patient with coronary artery disease and vascular disease of the lower limbs (obliterating endarteritis) revealed skin pallor and dystrophy, local temperature decrease, sense shock, pain. The patient is likely to have the following disorder of the peripheral blood circulation:
*a. Obstruction ischemia
b. Angiospastic ischemia
c. Arterial hyperaemia
d. Venous hyperaemia
e. Compression ischemia
1543. Examination of the lower limbs of a 40-year-old patient with coronary artery disease and vascular disease of the lower limbs (obliterating endarteritis) revealed skin pallor and dystrophy, local temperature decrease, sense shock, pain. The patient is likely to have the following disorder of the peripheral blood circulation:
a. Compression ischemia
b. Arterial hyperaemia
c. Angiospastic ischemia
*d. Obstruction ischemia
e. Venous hyperaemia
1544. Examination of the lower limbs of a 40-year-old patient with coronary artery disease and vascular disease of the lower limbs (obliterating endarteritis) revealed skin pallor and dystrophy, local temperature decrease, sense shock, pain. The patient is likely to have the following disorder of the peripheral blood circulation:
a. Venous hyperaemia
b. Angiospastic ischemia
c. Arterial hyperaemia
d. Compression ischemia
*e. Obstruction ischemia
1545. Examination of the patient's oral cavity detects roseola rash, pustules, and papules on the mucosa of the soft palate. Microscopy of the smears prepared from the discharge and stained according to Romanowsky-Giemsa revealed pale pink wavy microorganisms. What microorganisms are the likely cause of this pathology?
*a. Treponema pallidum
b. Staphylococci
c. Candida fungi
d. Streptococci
e. Meningococci
1546. Examination of the patient's oral cavity detects roseola rash, pustules, and papules on the mucosa of the soft palate. Microscopy of the smears prepared from the discharge and stained according to Romanowsky-Giemsa revealed pale pink wavy microorganisms. What microorganisms are the likely cause of this pathology?
a. Candida fungi
*b. Treponema pallidum
c. Meningococci
d. Staphylococci
e. Streptococci
1547. Examination of the patient's oral cavity detects roseola rash, pustules, and papules on the mucosa of the soft palate. Microscopy of the smears prepared from the discharge and stained according to Romanowsky-Giemsa revealed pale pink wavy microorganisms. What microorganisms are the likely cause of this pathology?
a. Staphylococci
b. Streptococci
*c. Treponema pallidum
d. Meningococci
e. Candida fungi
1548. Examination of the patient's oral cavity detects the signs of aphthous stomatitis. Microscopy of the smears prepared from the contents of the aphthous ulcers shows gram-positive round and oval cells that vary in size and exhibit signs of budding pattern of cell division. What microorganisms are the likely cause of this pathology?
a. Staphylococci
b. Meningococci
c. Pneumococci
d. Streptococci
*e. Candida fungi
1549. Examination of the patient's oral cavity detects the signs of aphthous stomatitis. Microscopy of the smears prepared from the contents of the aphthous ulcers shows gram-positive round and oval cells that vary in size and exhibit signs of budding pattern of cell division. What microorganisms are the likely cause of this pathology?
a. Staphylococci
b. Streptococci
c. Pneumococci
d. Meningococci
*e. Candida fungi
1550. Examination of the patient's oral cavity detects the signs of aphthous stomatitis. Microscopy of the smears prepared from the contents of the aphthous ulcers shows gram-positive round and oval cells that vary in size and exhibit signs of budding pattern of cell division. What microorganisms are the likely cause of this pathology?
a. Streptococci
b. Pneumococci
*c. Candida fungi
d. Staphylococci
e. Meningococci
1551. Examination of the sputum of a patient with suspected pneumonia detects blue-violet lanceolate cocci with a capsule, arranged in pairs. What staining method has been used to detect the capsule?
a. Gram stain
b. Neisser stain
c. Ziehl-Neelsen stain
*d. Burri-Gins stain
e. Ozheshko stain
1552. Examination of the sputum of a patient with suspected pneumonia detects blue-violet lanceolate cocci with a capsule, arranged in pairs. What staining method has been used to detect the capsule?
a. Neisser stain
b. Gram stain
*c. Burri-Gins stain
d. Ziehl-Neelsen stain
e. Ozheshko stain
1553. Examination of the sputum of a patient with suspected pneumonia detects blue-violet lanceolate cocci with a capsule, arranged in pairs. What staining method has been used to detect the capsule?
a. Ozheshko stain
b. Gram stain
*c. Burri-Gins stain
d. Ziehl-Neelsen stain
e. Neisser stain
1554. Explain to a doctor, what drug has the effect, closest to acetylcysteine, and can be used as its substitute, if acetylcysteine is not available in a pharmacy:
*a. Ambroxol
b. Libexin (Prenoxdiazine)
c. Codeine phosphate
d. Sodium chloride
e. Sodium bicarbonate
1555. Explain to a doctor, what drug has the effect, closest to acetylcysteine, and can be used as its substitute, if acetylcysteine is not available in a pharmacy:
*a. Ambroxol
b. Sodium bicarbonate
c. Sodium chloride
d. Codeine phosphate
e. Libexin (Prenoxdiazine)
1556. Explain to a doctor, what drug has the effect, closest to acetylcysteine, and can be used as its substitute, if acetylcysteine is not available in a pharmacy:
*a. Ambroxol
b. Sodium chloride
c. Sodium bicarbonate
d. Libexin (Prenoxdiazine)
e. Codeine phosphate
1557. Explain to a pharmacy student, why group III anions have no group reagent:
a. They belong to toxic elements
b. They have large ionic radii
c. They have close ionic radii
*d. They form water-soluble salts with most cations
e. They can form soluble acids
1558. Explain to a pharmacy student, why group III anions have no group reagent:
a. They have large ionic radii
*b. They form water-soluble salts with most cations
c. They have close ionic radii
d. They can form soluble acids
e. They belong to toxic elements
1559. Explain to a pharmacy student, why group III anions have no group reagent:
a. They have large ionic radii
b. They have close ionic radii
c. They belong to toxic elements
d. They can form soluble acids
*e. They form water-soluble salts with most cations
1560. Explain to a young physician, how to prevent withdrawal syndrome in a patient after completion of glucocorticoid therapy:
a. Immunostimulating therapy
*b. Gradual decrease of the dose
c. CNS stimulants
d. Vitamin preparations
e. Antidotal therapy
1561. Explain to a young physician, how to prevent withdrawal syndrome in a patient after completion of glucocorticoid therapy:
a. Immunostimulating therapy
b. Vitamin preparations
c. Antidotal therapy
d. CNS stimulants
*e. Gradual decrease of the dose
1562. Explain to a young physician, how to prevent withdrawal syndrome in a patient after completion of glucocorticoid therapy:
a. Vitamin preparations
b. Immunostimulating therapy
c. Antidotal therapy
*d. Gradual decrease of the dose
e. CNS stimulants
1563. Extraction is often used in analysis of medicinal substances. In this method, the degree of extraction of the substance that is being determined depends on the following:
*a. Distribution coefficient
b. The mass of the substance being extracted
c. pH of the solution
d. The amount of the substance being extracted
e. Temperature
1564. Extraction is often used in analysis of medicinal substances. In this method, the degree of extraction of the substance that is being determined depends on the following:
a. Temperature
b. The amount of the substance being extracted
c. The mass of the substance being extracted
*d. Distribution coefficient
e. pH of the solution
1565. Extraction is often used in analysis of medicinal substances. In this method, the degree of extraction of the substance that is being determined depends on the following:
a. pH of the solution
*b. Distribution coefficient
c. The mass of the substance being extracted
d. The amount of the substance being extracted
e. Temperature
1566. Extreme therapeutic effect of activated carbon is due to its high specific surface area. Name the phenomenon when gases are absorbed only by the surface of a solid body:
*a. Adsorption
b. Adhesion
c. Cohesion
d. Recuperation
e. Desorption
1567. Extreme therapeutic effect of activated carbon is due to its high specific surface area. Name the phenomenon when gases are absorbed only by the surface of a solid body:
a. Adhesion
b. Desorption
*c. Adsorption
d. Recuperation
e. Cohesion
1568. Extreme therapeutic effect of activated carbon is due to its high specific surface area. Name the phenomenon when gases are absorbed only by the surface of a solid body:
a. Recuperation
b. Desorption
*c. Adsorption
d. Cohesion
e. Adhesion
1569. Exudation is an effect of inflammation-caused disruption of blood circulation. In the course of inflammatory process it starts at the following stage of vascular disorder:
a. Prestasis
*b. Arterial hyperemia
c. Stasis
d. Arterioles spasm
e. Venous hyperemia
1570. Exudation is an effect of inflammation-caused disruption of blood circulation. In the course of inflammatory process it starts at the following stage of vascular disorder:
a. Prestasis
b. Venous hyperemia
*c. Arterial hyperemia
d. Stasis
e. Arterioles spasm
1571. Exudation is an effect of inflammation-caused disruption of blood circulation. In the course of inflammatory process it starts at the following stage of vascular disorder:
a. Venous hyperemia
b. Prestasis
*c. Arterial hyperemia
d. Arterioles spasm
e. Stasis
1572. Fatty acids are being synthesized in human body. What compound is intial in this synthesis process?
a. Cholesterol
*b. Acetyl-СоА
c. Succinate
d. Glycine
e. Vitamin C
1573. Fatty acids are being synthesized in human body. What compound is intial in this synthesis process?
a. Succinate
b. Vitamin C
c. Cholesterol
d. Glycine
*e. Acetyl-СоА
1574. Fatty acids are being synthesized in human body. What compound is intial in this synthesis process?
a. Vitamin C
*b. Acetyl-СоА
c. Glycine
d. Succinate
e. Cholesterol
1575. Fatty degeneration of liver is prevented by lipotropic substances. Which of the following substances belongs to them?
a. Bilirubin
b. Cholesterol
c. Glucose
d. Glycine
*e. Methionine
1576. Fatty degeneration of liver is prevented by lipotropic substances. Which of the following substances belongs to them?
a. Cholesterol
b. Glucose
c. Bilirubin
*d. Methionine
e. Glycine
1577. Fatty degeneration of liver is prevented by lipotropic substances. Which of the following substances belongs to them?
a. Glucose
b. Bilirubin
c. Cholesterol
*d. Methionine
e. Glycine
1578. Fenofibrate belongs to the following pharmacological group:
a. Hypnotics
b. Indirect-acting anticoagulants
c. Antihypertensive drugs
*d. Hypolipidemic drugs
e. Fibrinolysis inhibitors
1579. Fenofibrate belongs to the following pharmacological group:
a. Indirect-acting anticoagulants
b. Antihypertensive drugs
*c. Hypolipidemic drugs
d. Fibrinolysis inhibitors
e. Hypnotics
1580. Fenofibrate belongs to the following pharmacological group:
a. Indirect-acting anticoagulants
b. Antihypertensive drugs
*c. Hypolipidemic drugs
d. Hypnotics
e. Fibrinolysis inhibitors
1581. Fibrillar proteins can be characterized by the presence of several parallel polypeptide chains in their structure. What fibrillar protein is a component of hair, skin, and nails?
*a. Keratin
b. Globulin
c. Prothrombin
d. Albumin
e. Histone
1582. Fibrillar proteins can be characterized by the presence of several parallel polypeptide chains in their structure. What fibrillar protein is a component of hair, skin, and nails?
a. Albumin
b. Globulin
c. Prothrombin
*d. Keratin
e. Histone
1583. Fibrillar proteins can be characterized by the presence of several parallel polypeptide chains in their structure. What fibrillar protein is a component of hair, skin, and nails?
a. Prothrombin
b. Albumin
c. Histone
d. Globulin
*e. Keratin
1584. Flowers with cruciform (cross-shaped) flower-cup and corolla, tetradynamous androecium, pod and silicle seeds are characteristic of the following family:
a. Papaveraceae
b. Ranunculaceae
c. Rosaceae
*d. Brassicaceae
e. Asteraceae
1585. Flowers with cruciform (cross-shaped) flower-cup and corolla, tetradynamous androecium, pod and silicle seeds are characteristic of the following family:
a. Papaveraceae
b. Rosaceae
c. Ranunculaceae
d. Asteraceae
*e. Brassicaceae
1586. Flowers with cruciform (cross-shaped) flower-cup and corolla, tetradynamous androecium, pod and silicle seeds are characteristic of the following family:
a. Ranunculaceae
b. Asteraceae
c. Rosaceae
d. Papaveraceae
*e. Brassicaceae
1587. Foam aerosols are used for burn treatment. What type of dispersed systems are foams?
*a. Gas-liquid
b. Liquid-solid
c. Liquid-liquid
d. Solid-solid
e. Solid-liquid
1588. Foam aerosols are used for burn treatment. What type of dispersed systems are foams?
a. Liquid-solid
b. Solid-liquid
*c. Gas-liquid
d. Solid-solid
e. Liquid-liquid
1589. Foam aerosols are used for burn treatment. What type of dispersed systems are foams?
a. Solid-liquid
b. Liquid-liquid
*c. Gas-liquid
d. Solid-solid
e. Liquid-solid
1590. For a humoral immune response to form, a number of cells of the immune system must interact with the antigen. What cells are the first to encounter the antigen?
*a. Macrophages
b. NK cells
c. B lymphocytes
d. Suppressor T cells
e. Helper T cells
1591. For a humoral immune response to form, a number of cells of the immune system must interact with the antigen. What cells are the first to encounter the antigen?
a. B lymphocytes
b. Helper T cells
*c. Macrophages
d. Suppressor T cells
e. NK cells
1592. For a humoral immune response to form, a number of cells of the immune system must interact with the antigen. What cells are the first to encounter the antigen?
a. NK cells
*b. Macrophages
c. Helper T cells
d. B lymphocytes
e. Suppressor T cells
1593. For diagnostics of meningitis, smears of the cerebrospinal fluid sediment, stained using the Gram technique are being studied. What finding can confirm the diagnosis of meningococcal infection?
a. Diplococci surrounded by a capsule
b. Lancet-shaped Gram-positive diplococci
c. Gram-negative cocci bacteria located within leukocytes
d. Gram-positive diplococci located within leukocytes
*e. Gram-negative diplococci located within leukocytes and outside of them
1594. For diagnostics of meningitis, smears of the cerebrospinal fluid sediment, stained using the Gram technique are being studied. What finding can confirm the diagnosis of meningococcal infection?
a. Gram-positive diplococci located within leukocytes
*b. Gram-negative diplococci located within leukocytes and outside of them
c. Lancet-shaped Gram-positive diplococci
d. Gram-negative cocci bacteria located within leukocytes
e. Diplococci surrounded by a capsule
1595. For diagnostics of meningitis, smears of the cerebrospinal fluid sediment, stained using the Gram technique are being studied. What finding can confirm the diagnosis of meningococcal infection?
a. Lancet-shaped Gram-positive diplococci
b. Gram-negative cocci bacteria located within leukocytes
c. Gram-positive diplococci located within leukocytes
*d. Gram-negative diplococci located within leukocytes and outside of them
e. Diplococci surrounded by a capsule
1596. For eczema treatment, a doctor has prescribed the patient a medicine that must be applied transdermally. What is the maximum number of microbial bodies allowed in 1 g of this product, according to the regulations of the WHO and the Pharmacopoeia?
a. A total of  500 bacteria and fungi
b. 100 bacteria and 50 fungi
c. A total of 1000 bacteria and fungi
d. 100 bacteria and 100 fungi
*e. A total of 100 bacteria and fungi
1597. For eczema treatment, a doctor has prescribed the patient a medicine that must be applied transdermally. What is the maximum number of microbial bodies allowed in 1 g of this product, according to the regulations of the WHO and the Pharmacopoeia?
a. A total of  500 bacteria and fungi
b. A total of 1000 bacteria and fungi
c. 100 bacteria and 50 fungi
d. 100 bacteria and 100 fungi
*e. A total of 100 bacteria and fungi
1598. For eczema treatment, a doctor has prescribed the patient a medicine that must be applied transdermally. What is the maximum number of microbial bodies allowed in 1 g of this product, according to the regulations of the WHO and the Pharmacopoeia?
a. A total of 1000 bacteria and fungi
b. 100 bacteria and 100 fungi
c. 100 bacteria and 50 fungi
*d. A total of 100 bacteria and fungi
e. A total of  500 bacteria and fungi
1599. For the specific prevention of influenza, the employees of an enterprise were vaccinated with "Influvac". What type of immunity will develop in the body of the vaccinated?
a. Innate congenital
b. Artificial passive
c. Natural active
d. Natural passive
*e. Artificial active
1600. For the specific prevention of influenza, the employees of an enterprise were vaccinated with "Influvac". What type of immunity will develop in the body of the vaccinated?
a. Natural active
b. Natural passive
c. Artificial passive
*d. Artificial active
e. Innate congenital
1601. For the specific prevention of influenza, the employees of an enterprise were vaccinated with "Influvac". What type of immunity will develop in the body of the vaccinated?
a. Natural passive
*b. Artificial active
c. Natural active
d. Innate congenital
e. Artificial passive
1602. For two weeks, a man has been taking tetracycline without a doctor's prescription for treatment of furunculosis. A yellowish color of the skin and sclera is observed in this man. When interviewing this person, a pharmacist determined that his condition developed after taking the medicines. What type of jaundice has developed in this case?
*a. Hepatic
b. Subhepatic
c. Hereditary
d. Cholestatic
e. Hemolytic
1603. For two weeks, a man has been taking tetracycline without a doctor's prescription for treatment of furunculosis. A yellowish color of the skin and sclera is observed in this man. When interviewing this person, a pharmacist determined that his condition developed after taking the medicines. What type of jaundice has developed in this case?
a. Cholestatic
b. Hemolytic
c. Hereditary
d. Subhepatic
*e. Hepatic
1604. For two weeks, a man has been taking tetracycline without a doctor's prescription for treatment of furunculosis. A yellowish color of the skin and sclera is observed in this man. When interviewing this person, a pharmacist determined that his condition developed after taking the medicines. What type of jaundice has developed in this case?
a. Subhepatic
b. Hemolytic
c. Cholestatic
*d. Hepatic
e. Hereditary
1605. Formation enthalpy equals zero for the following substance:
*a. O_2
b. H_2O_2
c. CaCO_3
d. H_2SO_4
e. СO_2
1606. Formation enthalpy equals zero for the following substance:
*a. O_2
b. H_2O_2
c. H_2SO_4
d. CaCO_3
e. СO_2
1607. Formation enthalpy equals zero for the following substance:
*a. O_2
b. H_2SO_4
c. СO_2
d. H_2O_2
e. CaCO_3
1608. Friedel-Crafts alkylation takes place in the presence of catalysts  -  Lewis acids. What compounds are included in the list of Lewis acids?
a. H_2O, H_2O_2
b. KOH, CaO
*c. АlCl_3, FeBr_3
d. KMnO_4, Na_2S_2O_3
e. H_2SO_4, HNO_3
1609. Friedel-Crafts alkylation takes place in the presence of catalysts  -  Lewis acids. What compounds are included in the list of Lewis acids?
a. KMnO_4, Na_2S_2O_3
*b. АlCl_3, FeBr_3
c. H_2SO_4, HNO_3
d. KOH, CaO
e. H_2O, H_2O_2
1610. Friedel-Crafts alkylation takes place in the presence of catalysts  -  Lewis acids. What compounds are included in the list of Lewis acids?
a. KOH, CaO
*b. АlCl_3, FeBr_3
c. KMnO_4, Na_2S_2O_3
d. H_2O, H_2O_2
e. H_2SO_4, HNO_3
1611. From the patient's pleural cavity, an exudate sample was obtained. This sample has the following composition: protein -- 34 g/L, blood corpuscles -- 3600 in mcL, predominantly neutrophils, pH -- 6.8. What type of exudate is it?
*a. Purulent
b. Fibrinous
c. Serous
d. Hemorrhagic
e. Mixed
1612. From the patient's pleural cavity, an exudate sample was obtained. This sample has the following composition: protein -- 34 g/L, blood corpuscles -- 3600 in mcL, predominantly neutrophils, pH -- 6.8. What type of exudate is it?
a. Fibrinous
b. Serous
c. Mixed
*d. Purulent
e. Hemorrhagic
1613. From the patient's pleural cavity, an exudate sample was obtained. This sample has the following composition: protein -- 34 g/L, blood corpuscles -- 3600 in mcL, predominantly neutrophils, pH -- 6.8. What type of exudate is it?
a. Serous
b. Hemorrhagic
*c. Purulent
d. Mixed
e. Fibrinous
1614. Gelatin expands the most in the following solvent:
a. Diethyl ether
b. Acetic acid solution
c. Ethanol
d. Benzene
*e. Water
1615. Gelatin expands the most in the following solvent:
a. Diethyl ether
b. Ethanol
c. Acetic acid solution
d. Benzene
*e. Water
1616. Gout develops when purine nucleotide metabolism is disturbed. The doctor prescribed the patient allopurinol that is a competitive inhibitor of:
a. Alcohol dehydrogenase
*b. Xanthine oxidase
c. Lactate dehydrogenase
d. Hexokinase
e. Succinate dehydrogenase
1617. Gout develops when purine nucleotide metabolism is disturbed. The doctor prescribed the patient allopurinol that is a competitive inhibitor of:
a. Hexokinase
b. Succinate dehydrogenase
c. Lactate dehydrogenase
*d. Xanthine oxidase
e. Alcohol dehydrogenase
1618. Gout develops when purine nucleotide metabolism is disturbed. The doctor prescribed the patient allopurinol that is a competitive inhibitor of:
a. Succinate dehydrogenase
b. Alcohol dehydrogenase
*c. Xanthine oxidase
d. Lactate dehydrogenase
e. Hexokinase
1619. Gravimetric titration was used to determine aluminium mass fraction in a medicinal preparation. Ammonium hydroxide solution was used as a precipitant. In this case the gravimetric form will be:
*a. Aluminium oxide
b. Aluminium hydroxide
c. Aluminium carbonate
d. Ammonium chloride
e. Ammonium nitrate
1620. Gravimetric titration was used to determine aluminium mass fraction in a medicinal preparation. Ammonium hydroxide solution was used as a precipitant. In this case the gravimetric form will be:
a. Aluminium hydroxide
b. Ammonium chloride
c. Aluminium carbonate
d. Ammonium nitrate
*e. Aluminium oxide
1621. Gravimetric titration was used to determine aluminium mass fraction in a medicinal preparation. Ammonium hydroxide solution was used as a precipitant. In this case the gravimetric form will be:
a. Ammonium nitrate
b. Aluminium hydroxide
*c. Aluminium oxide
d. Aluminium carbonate
e. Ammonium chloride
1622. Gravimetry was used to analyze sodium sulfate crystalline hydrate by precipitating sulfate ions with a barium chloride solution. After its maturation, the barium sulfate precipitate must be washed using decantation. What is used as a washing liquid for this purpose?
a. Barium chloride solution
b. Ammonium sulfate solution
c. Distilled water
d. Sodium sulfate solution
*e. Dilute solution of sulfuric acid
1623. Gravimetry was used to analyze sodium sulfate crystalline hydrate by precipitating sulfate ions with a barium chloride solution. After its maturation, the barium sulfate precipitate must be washed using decantation. What is used as a washing liquid for this purpose?
a. Distilled water
b. Ammonium sulfate solution
c. Sodium sulfate solution
*d. Dilute solution of sulfuric acid
e. Barium chloride solution
1624. Gravimetry was used to analyze sodium sulfate crystalline hydrate by precipitating sulfate ions with a barium chloride solution. After its maturation, the barium sulfate precipitate must be washed using decantation. What is used as a washing liquid for this purpose?
a. Sodium sulfate solution
b. Distilled water
c. Barium chloride solution
d. Ammonium sulfate solution
*e. Dilute solution of sulfuric acid
1625. Gypsum water is added to a test solution for analytical determination of barium ions. What visual effect is observed in this case?
a. A characteristic odor appearing
*b. Formation of a white precipitate
c. Production of a brown gas
d. Yellow coloring of the solution
e. Formation of a blue precipitate
1626. Gypsum water is added to a test solution for analytical determination of barium ions. What visual effect is observed in this case?
a. A characteristic odor appearing
b. Yellow coloring of the solution
*c. Formation of a white precipitate
d. Formation of a blue precipitate
e. Production of a brown gas
1627. Gypsum water is added to a test solution for analytical determination of barium ions. What visual effect is observed in this case?
a. Yellow coloring of the solution
b. Production of a brown gas
c. A characteristic odor appearing
d. Formation of a blue precipitate
*e. Formation of a white precipitate
1628. HIV-infection occupational risk groups include people of various professions, healthcare workers included. Specify the mosl likely route of infection transmission for healthcare workers:
*a. Parenteral transmission
b. Droplet transmission
c. Vector-borne transmission
d. Transmission via airborne dust particles
e. Fecal-oral transmission
1629. HIV-infection occupational risk groups include people of various professions, healthcare workers included. Specify the mosl likely route of infection transmission for healthcare workers:
a. Fecal-oral transmission
b. Vector-borne transmission
c. Droplet transmission
*d. Parenteral transmission
e. Transmission via airborne dust particles
1630. HIV-infection occupational risk groups include people of various professions, healthcare workers included. Specify the mosl likely route of infection transmission for healthcare workers:
a. Vector-borne transmission
*b. Parenteral transmission
c. Transmission via airborne dust particles
d. Fecal-oral transmission
e. Droplet transmission
1631. Halogen atoms can be detected in an organic compound, if the following test is performed:
*a. Beilstein's test
b. Lucas' test
c. Molisch's test
d. Baeyer's test
e. Iodoform test
1632. Halogen atoms can be detected in an organic compound, if the following test is performed:
a. Lucas' test
*b. Beilstein's test
c. Iodoform test
d. Molisch's test
e. Baeyer's test
1633. Halogen atoms can be detected in an organic compound, if the following test is performed:
a. Lucas' test
b. Iodoform test
c. Baeyer's test
d. Molisch's test
*e. Beilstein's test
1634. Having matured, pistillate catkins of Betula penduta fall apart freeing nutlet seeds with:
a. Bristly hooks
b. Villous coma
c. One large wing petal
d. Two air vesicles
*e. Two membranous wing petals
1635. Having matured, pistillate catkins of Betula penduta fall apart freeing nutlet seeds with:
a. One large wing petal
*b. Two membranous wing petals
c. Villous coma
d. Bristly hooks
e. Two air vesicles
1636. Having matured, pistillate catkins of Betula penduta fall apart freeing nutlet seeds with:
a. Two air vesicles
b. Bristly hooks
c. Villous coma
d. One large wing petal
*e. Two membranous wing petals
1637. Having prepared a nutrient medium with carbohydrate solutions, the laboratory assistant sterilized it. What sterilization method was used?
a. Dry heat
b. One-time boiling
*c. Fractional, using flowing steam
d. Steam under pressure
e. Ultraviolet irradiation
1638. Having prepared a nutrient medium with carbohydrate solutions, the laboratory assistant sterilized it. What sterilization method was used?
a. Dry heat
b. One-time boiling
c. Ultraviolet irradiation
*d. Fractional, using flowing steam
e. Steam under pressure
1639. Having prepared a nutrient medium with carbohydrate solutions, the laboratory assistant sterilized it. What sterilization method was used?
a. One-time boiling
b. Steam under pressure
c. Dry heat
*d. Fractional, using flowing steam
e. Ultraviolet irradiation
1640. Heating of sodium phenolate in CO_2 stream results in production of a certain carboxylic acid. Name the resulting compound:
*a. Salicylic acid
b. Ethyl salicylate
c. Benzoic acid
d. Aminophenol
e. Phenyl salicylate
1641. Heating of sodium phenolate in CO_2 stream results in production of a certain carboxylic acid. Name the resulting compound:
a. Ethyl salicylate
*b. Salicylic acid
c. Aminophenol
d. Phenyl salicylate
e. Benzoic acid
1642. Heating of sodium phenolate in CO_2 stream results in production of a certain carboxylic acid. Name the resulting compound:
a. Ethyl salicylate
b. Phenyl salicylate
c. Benzoic acid
*d. Salicylic acid
e. Aminophenol
1643. Hemoglobin breakdown begins in the cells of reticuloendothelial system. What enzyme catalyzes the reduction reaction of biliverdine into bilirubin?
a. Heme oxygenase
b. Xanthine oxidase
c. Hexokinase
d. beta-glucuronidase
*e. Biliverdine reductase
1644. Hemoglobin breakdown begins in the cells of reticuloendothelial system. What enzyme catalyzes the reduction reaction of biliverdine into bilirubin?
a. Hexokinase
b. Heme oxygenase
*c. Biliverdine reductase
d. Xanthine oxidase
e. beta-glucuronidase
1645. Hemoglobin breakdown begins in the cells of reticuloendothelial system. What enzyme catalyzes the reduction reaction of biliverdine into bilirubin?
a. Xanthine oxidase
b. beta-glucuronidase
c. Heme oxygenase
*d. Biliverdine reductase
e. Hexokinase
1646. Hemoglobin catabolism results in release of iron that is transported to the bone marrow by a certain transfer protein and used again for the synthesis of hemoglobin. Specify this transfer protein:
*a. Transferrin (siderophilin)
b. Ceruloplasmin
c. Albumin
d. Haptoglobin
e. Transcobalamin
1647. Hemoglobin catabolism results in release of iron that is transported to the bone marrow by a certain transfer protein and used again for the synthesis of hemoglobin. Specify this transfer protein:
a. Albumin
b. Ceruloplasmin
c. Haptoglobin
d. Transcobalamin
*e. Transferrin (siderophilin)
1648. Hemoglobin catabolism results in release of iron that is transported to the bone marrow by a certain transfer protein and used again for the synthesis of hemoglobin. Specify this transfer protein:
a. Haptoglobin
b. Ceruloplasmin
c. Albumin
*d. Transferrin (siderophilin)
e. Transcobalamin
1649. Heparin is a direct-acting anticoagulant that decreases blood clotting and prevents formation of the thrombus. This substance activity is based on the phenomenon of:
a. Micelle formation
b. Syneresis
c. Thixotropy
*d. ''Colloidal protection''
e. Dialysis
1650. Heparin is a direct-acting anticoagulant that decreases blood clotting and prevents formation of the thrombus. This substance activity is based on the phenomenon of:
a. Micelle formation
b. Thixotropy
c. Syneresis
d. Dialysis
*e. ''Colloidal protection''
1651. Heparin is a direct-acting anticoagulant that decreases blood clotting and prevents formation of the thrombus. This substance activity is based on the phenomenon of:
a. Syneresis
b. Thixotropy
c. Dialysis
*d. ''Colloidal protection''
e. Micelle formation
1652. Heparin is a potent natural anticoagulant, synthesized in mast cells. What is the chemical nature of this compound?
*a. Heteropolysaccharide
b. Phospholipid
c. Homopolysaccharide
d. Simple protein
e. Steroid
1653. Heparin is a potent natural anticoagulant, synthesized in mast cells. What is the chemical nature of this compound?
a. Homopolysaccharide
*b. Heteropolysaccharide
c. Steroid
d. Phospholipid
e. Simple protein
1654. Heparin is a potent natural anticoagulant, synthesized in mast cells. What is the chemical nature of this compound?
a. Homopolysaccharide
b. Steroid
c. Phospholipid
*d. Heteropolysaccharide
e. Simple protein
1655. Heparin was prescribed as a part of complex therapy for myocardial infarction. This drug belongs to the following group:
a. Detoxifiers
*b. Direct anticoagulants
c. Coagulants
d. Vitamin preparations
e. Hormonal preparations
1656. Heparin was prescribed as a part of complex therapy for myocardial infarction. This drug belongs to the following group:
a. Hormonal preparations
*b. Direct anticoagulants
c. Detoxifiers
d. Coagulants
e. Vitamin preparations
1657. Heparin was prescribed as a part of complex therapy for myocardial infarction. This drug belongs to the following group:
a. Hormonal preparations
b. Detoxifiers
c. Vitamin preparations
*d. Direct anticoagulants
e. Coagulants
1658. Herbarium specimens of medicinal plants are being studied. Which one of them belongs to Rosaceae family?
a. Conium  maculatum
b. Melilotus officinalis
*c. Crataegus sanguinea
d. Capsella bursa-pastoris
e. Polygonum persicaria
1659. Herbarium specimens of medicinal plants are being studied. Which one of them belongs to Rosaceae family?
a. Melilotus officinalis
b. Conium  maculatum
c. Capsella bursa-pastoris
d. Polygonum persicaria
*e. Crataegus sanguinea
1660. Herbarium specimens of medicinal plants are being studied. Which one of them belongs to Rosaceae family?
a. Polygonum persicaria
b. Capsella bursa-pastoris
*c. Crataegus sanguinea
d. Melilotus officinalis
e. Conium  maculatum
1661. High-molecular substances can be isolated from the solution using electrolytes. Name this process.
*a. Salting out
b. Swelling
c. Coagulation
d. Aggregation
e. Sedimentation
1662. High-molecular substances can be isolated from the solution using electrolytes. Name this process.
*a. Salting out
b. Swelling
c. Sedimentation
d. Coagulation
e. Aggregation
1663. High-molecular substances can be isolated from the solution using electrolytes. Name this process.
a. Coagulation
b. Swelling
c. Aggregation
*d. Salting out
e. Sedimentation
1664. Hormone-like substances from the group of eicosanoids can be used to stimulate labor activity during childbirth and as contraceptives. What substances have this effect?
*a. Prostaglandins
b. Endorphins
c. Interleukins
d. Enkephalins
e. Angiotensins
1665. Hormone-like substances from the group of eicosanoids can be used to stimulate labor activity during childbirth and as contraceptives. What substances have this effect?
a. Endorphins
b. Angiotensins
c. Enkephalins
*d. Prostaglandins
e. Interleukins
1666. Hormone-like substances from the group of eicosanoids can be used to stimulate labor activity during childbirth and as contraceptives. What substances have this effect?
a. Enkephalins
b. Angiotensins
*c. Prostaglandins
d. Endorphins
e. Interleukins
1667. Hormones regulate numerous metabolic processes. What hormone activates glycogen synthesis?
*a. Insulin
b. Adrenaline
c. Vasopressin
d. Thyroxine
e. Oxytocin
1668. Hormones regulate numerous metabolic processes. What hormone activates glycogen synthesis?
a. Thyroxine
b. Adrenaline
c. Vasopressin
d. Oxytocin
*e. Insulin
1669. Hormones regulate numerous metabolic processes. What hormone activates glycogen synthesis?
a. Vasopressin
b. Oxytocin
c. Thyroxine
*d. Insulin
e. Adrenaline
1670. How according to the Pharmacopoeia is pH determined?
*a. Potentiometry
b. Polarography
c. Conductometry
d. Spectrophotometry
e. Indicator
1671. How according to the Pharmacopoeia is pH determined?
a. Conductometry
b. Indicator
*c. Potentiometry
d. Polarography
e. Spectrophotometry
1672. How according to the Pharmacopoeia is pH determined?
a. Indicator
b. Polarography
c. Spectrophotometry
d. Conductometry
*e. Potentiometry
1673. How does the value of the critical micelle concentration in homologous series change with an increase in the molecular mass of the surfactant?
*a. Decreases
b. Sharply increases
c. Remains unchanged
d. Reaches its maximum and then decreases
e. Increases
1674. How does the value of the critical micelle concentration in homologous series change with an increase in the molecular mass of the surfactant?
a. Sharply increases
b. Increases
c. Remains unchanged
d. Reaches its maximum and then decreases
*e. Decreases
1675. How does the value of the critical micelle concentration in homologous series change with an increase in the molecular mass of the surfactant?
a. Sharply increases
b. Reaches its maximum and then decreases
c. Remains unchanged
d. Increases
*e. Decreases
1676. How is the radial type of leaf blade different from the dorsiventral type?
a. It has spongy parenchyma
b. It has a vascular bundle
c. It has stomata
*d. It has hypodermis
e. It has trichomes
1677. How is the radial type of leaf blade different from the dorsiventral type?
a. It has spongy parenchyma
b. It has trichomes
c. It has stomata
*d. It has hypodermis
e. It has a vascular bundle
1678. How is the radial type of leaf blade different from the dorsiventral type?
a. It has stomata
b. It has trichomes
*c. It has hypodermis
d. It has spongy parenchyma
e. It has a vascular bundle
1679. How many atoms does a furanose cycle consist of?
a. 4
b. 7
*c. 5
d. 3
e. 6
1680. How many atoms does a furanose cycle consist of?
a. 6
b. 4
c. 7
*d. 5
e. 3
1681. How many atoms does a furanose cycle consist of?
a. 7
*b. 5
c. 3
d. 6
e. 4
1682. How will the rate of the chemical reaction 2NO(gas) + O_2(gas) = 2NO_2(gas) change if the pressure increases by three times?
*a. The rate will increase by 27 times
b. The rate will increase by three times
c. The rate will remain unchanged
d. The rate will decrease by 27 times
e. The rate will decrease by three times
1683. How will the rate of the chemical reaction 2NO(gas) + O_2(gas) = 2NO_2(gas) change if the pressure increases by three times?
a. The rate will increase by three times
b. The rate will decrease by three times
c. The rate will remain unchanged
*d. The rate will increase by 27 times
e. The rate will decrease by 27 times
1684. How will the rate of the chemical reaction 2NO(gas) + O_2(gas) = 2NO_2(gas) change if the pressure increases by three times?
a. The rate will remain unchanged
*b. The rate will increase by 27 times
c. The rate will increase by three times
d. The rate will decrease by 27 times
e. The rate will decrease by three times
1685. Human body assimilates fats only as emulsions. Vegetable oils and animal fats contained in food are emulsified when exposed to bile (an emulsifier). How does interface tension change in this case?
a. First increases, than decreases
b. Increases
*c. Decreases
d. Remains unchanged
e. First decreases, than increases
1686. Human body assimilates fats only as emulsions. Vegetable oils and animal fats contained in food are emulsified when exposed to bile (an emulsifier). How does interface tension change in this case?
a. Remains unchanged
b. First decreases, than increases
c. Increases
d. First increases, than decreases
*e. Decreases
1687. Human body assimilates fats only as emulsions. Vegetable oils and animal fats contained in food are emulsified when exposed to bile (an emulsifier). How does interface tension change in this case?
a. Remains unchanged
b. First increases, than decreases
c. Increases
d. First decreases, than increases
*e. Decreases
1688. Hydrochloric acid was added into the solution under investigation. The resulting precipitate was filtered, then this filter cake was processed with hot water; after the filtrate cooled, KI solution was added into it. What cation was present in the solution, if the precipitate was colored yellow?
*a. Pb^2+
b. Ag^+
c. Hg^2+
d. Ba^2+
e. Ca^2+
1689. Hydrochloric acid was added into the solution under investigation. The resulting precipitate was filtered, then this filter cake was processed with hot water; after the filtrate cooled, KI solution was added into it. What cation was present in the solution, if the precipitate was colored yellow?
a. Ba^2+
*b. Pb^2+
c. Ag^+
d. Ca^2+
e. Hg^2+
1690. Hydrochloric acid was added into the solution under investigation. The resulting precipitate was filtered, then this filter cake was processed with hot water; after the filtrate cooled, KI solution was added into it. What cation was present in the solution, if the precipitate was colored yellow?
a. Ca^2+
b. Ba^2+
*c. Pb^2+
d. Hg^2+
e. Ag^+
1691. Hydrolysis reaction will textbfNOT occur with:
a. Cellulose
*b. Glycerol
c. Fat
d. Starch
e. Protein
1692. Hydrolysis reaction will textbfNOT occur with:
a. Fat
*b. Glycerol
c. Cellulose
d. Protein
e. Starch
1693. Hydrolysis reaction will textbfNOT occur with:
a. Fat
*b. Glycerol
c. Protein
d. Cellulose
e. Starch
1694. Hydrolytic destruction of compounds is carried out by a certain class of enzymes - hydrolases. What compounds are being hydrolyzed with proteases?
a. Glucose
b. Higher fatty acids
*c. Proteins
d. Carbon dioxide
e. Pyruvic acid
1695. Hydrolytic destruction of compounds is carried out by a certain class of enzymes - hydrolases. What compounds are being hydrolyzed with proteases?
a. Higher fatty acids
b. Carbon dioxide
c. Pyruvic acid
d. Glucose
*e. Proteins
1696. Hydrolytic destruction of compounds is carried out by a certain class of enzymes - hydrolases. What compounds are being hydrolyzed with proteases?
a. Higher fatty acids
b. Glucose
c. Pyruvic acid
*d. Proteins
e. Carbon dioxide
1697. Hyperlipemia is observed in a patient 2-3 hours after eating greasy food. 9 hours later lipid ratio becomes normal again. How can this condition be characterised?
a. Hyperplastic obesity
b. Retention hyperlipemia
c. Transport hyperlipemia
*d. Alimentary hyperlipemia
e. Hypertrophic obesity
1698. Hyperlipemia is observed in a patient 2-3 hours after eating greasy food. 9 hours later lipid ratio becomes normal again. How can this condition be characterised?
a. Hypertrophic obesity
b. Hyperplastic obesity
c. Retention hyperlipemia
*d. Alimentary hyperlipemia
e. Transport hyperlipemia
1699. Hyperlipemia is observed in a patient 2-3 hours after eating greasy food. 9 hours later lipid ratio becomes normal again. How can this condition be characterised?
a. Retention hyperlipemia
*b. Alimentary hyperlipemia
c. Hyperplastic obesity
d. Transport hyperlipemia
e. Hypertrophic obesity
1700. If addition of an alkali solution and heating provokes the release of ammonia in an analyzed solution, it indicates that the analyzed solution contains the following ions:
*a. NH_4^+
b. NO_2^-
c. NO_3^-
d. Na^+
e. K^+
1701. If addition of an alkali solution and heating provokes the release of ammonia in an analyzed solution, it indicates that the analyzed solution contains the following ions:
a. K^+
b. NO_2^-
*c. NH_4^+
d. NO_3^-
e. Na^+
1702. If addition of an alkali solution and heating provokes the release of ammonia in an analyzed solution, it indicates that the analyzed solution contains the following ions:
a. Na^+
b. NO_3^-
*c. NH_4^+
d. K^+
e. NO_2^-
1703. If in the process of molecular adsorption the solute is being adsorbed more than the solvent, then the following occurs:
a. Ion adsorption
b. No adsorption
*c. Positive adsorption
d. Selective adsorption
e. Negative adsorption
1704. If in the process of molecular adsorption the solute is being adsorbed more than the solvent, then the following occurs:
a. Negative adsorption
b. No adsorption
*c. Positive adsorption
d. Ion adsorption
e. Selective adsorption
1705. If in the process of molecular adsorption the solute is being adsorbed more than the solvent, then the following occurs:
a. Selective adsorption
b. No adsorption
c. Ion adsorption
*d. Positive adsorption
e. Negative adsorption
1706. If the amount of a high molecular substance added into a sol is very small, then a decrease in its stability, instead of an increase, can occur. What is the name of this phenomenon?
*a. Sensitization
b. Sedimentation
c. Syneresis
d. Synergism
e. Solubilization
1707. If the amount of a high molecular substance added into a sol is very small, then a decrease in its stability, instead of an increase, can occur. What is the name of this phenomenon?
*a. Sensitization
b. Sedimentation
c. Synergism
d. Syneresis
e. Solubilization
1708. If the amount of a high molecular substance added into a sol is very small, then a decrease in its stability, instead of an increase, can occur. What is the name of this phenomenon?
*a. Sensitization
b. Solubilization
c. Sedimentation
d. Syneresis
e. Synergism
1709. If the amount of high-molecular substance added to the given sol is extremely small, it is possible its stability will decrease, instead of increase. What is this phenomenon called?
a. Sedimentation
b. Syneresis
*c. Sensitization
d. Solubilization
e. Synergism
1710. If the amount of high-molecular substance added to the given sol is extremely small, it is possible its stability will decrease, instead of increase. What is this phenomenon called?
a. Sedimentation
b. Syneresis
*c. Sensitization
d. Synergism
e. Solubilization
1711. If the amount of high-molecular substance added to the given sol is extremely small, it is possible its stability will decrease, instead of increase. What is this phenomenon called?
a. Syneresis
b. Synergism
c. Sedimentation
*d. Sensitization
e. Solubilization
1712. If there is no strophanthin in the pharmacy stock, the following cardiac glycoside can be used as its substitute:
*a. Corglycon (Convallatoxin)
b. Digitoxin
c. Izolanid (Lanatoside C)
d. -
e. Adonisid (Adonis vernalis glycosides)
1713. If there is no strophanthin in the pharmacy stock, the following cardiac glycoside can be used as its substitute:
a. -
*b. Corglycon (Convallatoxin)
c. Izolanid (Lanatoside C)
d. Digitoxin
e. Adonisid (Adonis vernalis glycosides)
1714. If there is no strophanthin in the pharmacy stock, the following cardiac glycoside can be used as its substitute:
a. Digitoxin
b. -
c. Izolanid (Lanatoside C)
d. Adonisid (Adonis vernalis glycosides)
*e. Corglycon (Convallatoxin)
1715. IgM to rubella virus were detected in the blood serum of a sick child. What stage of the disease progression is indicated by this sign?
a. Incubation
b. Persistent
c. Post-vaccination
*d. Acute
e. Chronic
1716. IgM to rubella virus were detected in the blood serum of a sick child. What stage of the disease progression is indicated by this sign?
a. Incubation
b. Post-vaccination
c. Chronic
d. Persistent
*e. Acute
1717. IgM to rubella virus were detected in the blood serum of a sick child. What stage of the disease progression is indicated by this sign?
a. Post-vaccination
*b. Acute
c. Persistent
d. Chronic
e. Incubation
1718. Illegal emigrants from Somalia were detained at the Ukrainian border. During medical examination, their 3-year-old child presents with muscle hypotonia and dystrophy, skin depigmentation, decreased turgor, and enlarged abdomen. The child is underweight. The diagnosis of kwashiorkor was made. This pathology is a type of partial starvation, namely the deficiency of:
*a. Proteins
b. Lipids
c. Energy
d. Carbohydrates
e. Vitamins
1719. Illegal emigrants from Somalia were detained at the Ukrainian border. During medical examination, their 3-year-old child presents with muscle hypotonia and dystrophy, skin depigmentation, decreased turgor, and enlarged abdomen. The child is underweight. The diagnosis of kwashiorkor was made. This pathology is a type of partial starvation, namely the deficiency of:
a. Energy
b. Lipids
c. Vitamins
d. Carbohydrates
*e. Proteins
1720. Illegal emigrants from Somalia were detained at the Ukrainian border. During medical examination, their 3-year-old child presents with muscle hypotonia and dystrophy, skin depigmentation, decreased turgor, and enlarged abdomen. The child is underweight. The diagnosis of kwashiorkor was made. This pathology is a type of partial starvation, namely the deficiency of:
a. Vitamins
b. Lipids
*c. Proteins
d. Carbohydrates
e. Energy
1721. In Allium cepa, the main axis ends in an inflorescence, in which peduncles of the same length emerge from one point. What type of inflorescence is it characteristic of?
a. Flat capitulum
*b. Umbel
c. Corymb
d. Spike
e. Raceme
1722. In Allium cepa, the main axis ends in an inflorescence, in which peduncles of the same length emerge from one point. What type of inflorescence is it characteristic of?
a. Flat capitulum
b. Corymb
c. Spike
d. Raceme
*e. Umbel
1723. In Allium cepa, the main axis ends in an inflorescence, in which peduncles of the same length emerge from one point. What type of inflorescence is it characteristic of?
a. Raceme
b. Spike
c. Flat capitulum
d. Corymb
*e. Umbel
1724. In March, the children in a kindergarten were given a salad made from fresh cabbage stored in a cold cellar. Several hours later, many of these children developed signs of food poisoning. What microorganisms are the likely cause of poisoning in this case, considering the conditions in which they were reproducing?
a. Facultative
b. Resident
c. Mesophiles
*d. Psychrophiles
e. Thermophiles
1725. In March, the children in a kindergarten were given a salad made from fresh cabbage stored in a cold cellar. Several hours later, many of these children developed signs of food poisoning. What microorganisms are the likely cause of poisoning in this case, considering the conditions in which they were reproducing?
a. Resident
b. Facultative
c. Mesophiles
*d. Psychrophiles
e. Thermophiles
1726. In March, the children in a kindergarten were given a salad made from fresh cabbage stored in a cold cellar. Several hours later, many of these children developed signs of food poisoning. What microorganisms are the likely cause of poisoning in this case, considering the conditions in which they were reproducing?
a. Resident
b. Mesophiles
c. Thermophiles
d. Facultative
*e. Psychrophiles
1727. In Ukraine all vaccinations are conducted according to the Ministry of Health decree ''On preventive immunization in Ukraine and control of quality and turnover of immunobiological medical products''. Which of the listed diseases is included in the national routine immunization schedule?
a. Botulism
b. Rickettsiosis
c. HIV infection
*d. Poliomyelitis
e. Influenza
1728. In Ukraine all vaccinations are conducted according to the Ministry of Health decree ''On preventive immunization in Ukraine and control of quality and turnover of immunobiological medical products''. Which of the listed diseases is included in the national routine immunization schedule?
a. Botulism
b. Rickettsiosis
c. HIV infection
d. Influenza
*e. Poliomyelitis
1729. In Ukraine all vaccinations are conducted according to the Ministry of Health decree ''On preventive immunization in Ukraine and control of quality and turnover of immunobiological medical products''. Which of the listed diseases is included in the national routine immunization schedule?
a. Rickettsiosis
b. HIV infection
c. Influenza
*d. Poliomyelitis
e. Botulism
1730. In a maternity hospital infants are vaccinated against tuberculosis on the 5-7 day. What vaccine is used specifically for prevention of tuberculosis?
*a. ВСG  vaccine
b. STI vaccine
c. TABTe vaccine
d. DPT vaccine
e. EV vaccine
1731. In a maternity hospital infants are vaccinated against tuberculosis on the 5-7 day. What vaccine is used specifically for prevention of tuberculosis?
a. DPT vaccine
*b. ВСG  vaccine
c. EV vaccine
d. STI vaccine
e. TABTe vaccine
1732. In a maternity hospital infants are vaccinated against tuberculosis on the 5-7 day. What vaccine is used specifically for prevention of tuberculosis?
a. EV vaccine
b. STI vaccine
*c. ВСG  vaccine
d. TABTe vaccine
e. DPT vaccine
1733. In a nursery-garden some medicinal plants developed signs of a disease: there are yellow spots and necrotic foci on the leaves. Sap of the diseased plants remained infectious even after passing through a bacteria-excluding filter. No microorganisms growth was detected on the nutrient medium. What microorganisms could be the cause of this disease?
a. Bacteria
b. Fungi
c. Ray fungi
*d. Viruses
e. Mycoplasma
1734. In a nursery-garden some medicinal plants developed signs of a disease: there are yellow spots and necrotic foci on the leaves. Sap of the diseased plants remained infectious even after passing through a bacteria-excluding filter. No microorganisms growth was detected on the nutrient medium. What microorganisms could be the cause of this disease?
a. Bacteria
b. Mycoplasma
c. Fungi
*d. Viruses
e. Ray fungi
1735. In a nursery-garden some medicinal plants developed signs of a disease: there are yellow spots and necrotic foci on the leaves. Sap of the diseased plants remained infectious even after passing through a bacteria-excluding filter. No microorganisms growth was detected on the nutrient medium. What microorganisms could be the cause of this disease?
a. Ray fungi
b. Bacteria
c. Fungi
d. Mycoplasma
*e. Viruses
1736. In a patient with jaundice, increased levels of direct bilirubin and cholemia were detected in the blood. No stercobilinogen was detected in urine. What disorder is observed in this case?
*a. Mechanical jaundice
b. Crigler-Najjar syndrome
c. Parenchymal jaundice
d. Gilbert's syndrome
e. Hemolytic jaundice
1737. In a patient with jaundice, increased levels of direct bilirubin and cholemia were detected in the blood. No stercobilinogen was detected in urine. What disorder is observed in this case?
*a. Mechanical jaundice
b. Parenchymal jaundice
c. Gilbert's syndrome
d. Crigler-Najjar syndrome
e. Hemolytic jaundice
1738. In a patient with jaundice, increased levels of direct bilirubin and cholemia were detected in the blood. No stercobilinogen was detected in urine. What disorder is observed in this case?
a. Hemolytic jaundice
b. Gilbert's syndrome
c. Parenchymal jaundice
d. Crigler-Najjar syndrome
*e. Mechanical jaundice
1739. In a plant being studied, epidermis of some of the leaves has a thick cuticle and a layer of wax on the surface, while epidermis of the other leaves has scales or numerous trichomes and only a few stomata. What group does this plant belong to?
*a. Xerophytes
b. Ephemerals
c. Hygrophytes
d. Mesophytes
e. Hydrophytes
1740. In a plant being studied, epidermis of some of the leaves has a thick cuticle and a layer of wax on the surface, while epidermis of the other leaves has scales or numerous trichomes and only a few stomata. What group does this plant belong to?
a. Hydrophytes
*b. Xerophytes
c. Mesophytes
d. Ephemerals
e. Hygrophytes
1741. In a plant being studied, epidermis of some of the leaves has a thick cuticle and a layer of wax on the surface, while epidermis of the other leaves has scales or numerous trichomes and only a few stomata. What group does this plant belong to?
a. Hygrophytes
b. Hydrophytes
c. Ephemerals
d. Mesophytes
*e. Xerophytes
1742. In acidimetry, titrants are prepared using the method of determined titer. What substance is used for their standardization according to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine?
*a. Sodium carbonate
b. Metallic zinc
c. Metallic iron
d. Sodium chloride
e. Potassium chloride
1743. In acidimetry, titrants are prepared using the method of determined titer. What substance is used for their standardization according to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine?
a. Metallic iron
b. Metallic zinc
c. Sodium chloride
d. Potassium chloride
*e. Sodium carbonate
1744. In acidimetry, titrants are prepared using the method of determined titer. What substance is used for their standardization according to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine?
a. Potassium chloride
b. Sodium chloride
*c. Sodium carbonate
d. Metallic zinc
e. Metallic iron
1745. In case of excessive consumption of carbohydrates, insulin stimulates the transformation of carbohydrates into lipids in the cells of adipose tissue. What process is involved in this transformation?
a. Heme synthesis
b. Gluconeogenesis
c. Lipolysis
*d. Synthesis of higher fatty acids
e. Uric acid synthesis
1746. In case of excessive consumption of carbohydrates, insulin stimulates the transformation of carbohydrates into lipids in the cells of adipose tissue. What process is involved in this transformation?
a. Heme synthesis
b. Gluconeogenesis
c. Uric acid synthesis
d. Lipolysis
*e. Synthesis of higher fatty acids
1747. In case of excessive consumption of carbohydrates, insulin stimulates the transformation of carbohydrates into lipids in the cells of adipose tissue. What process is involved in this transformation?
a. Heme synthesis
b. Uric acid synthesis
c. Lipolysis
d. Gluconeogenesis
*e. Synthesis of higher fatty acids
1748. In cases of long-term intoxication, a significant decrease in the activity of aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases can be observed. What metabolic process becomes disturbed in such cases?
*a. Biosynthesis of proteins
b. DNA repair
c. RNA processing
d. Genetic recombination
e. DNA replication
1749. In cases of long-term intoxication, a significant decrease in the activity of aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases can be observed. What metabolic process becomes disturbed in such cases?
a. RNA processing
b. DNA repair
c. Genetic recombination
d. DNA replication
*e. Biosynthesis of proteins
1750. In cases of long-term intoxication, a significant decrease in the activity of aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases can be observed. What metabolic process becomes disturbed in such cases?
a. RNA processing
b. DNA replication
*c. Biosynthesis of proteins
d. DNA repair
e. Genetic recombination
1751. In cases of systemic connective tissue diseases, protein and polysaccharide fragments of the connective tissue become destroyed. What protein is the main component of this tissue?
*a. Collagen
b. Keratin
c. Albumin
d. Actin
e. Myosin
1752. In cases of systemic connective tissue diseases, protein and polysaccharide fragments of the connective tissue become destroyed. What protein is the main component of this tissue?
a. Actin
b. Keratin
c. Myosin
*d. Collagen
e. Albumin
1753. In cases of systemic connective tissue diseases, protein and polysaccharide fragments of the connective tissue become destroyed. What protein is the main component of this tissue?
a. Myosin
*b. Collagen
c. Keratin
d. Actin
e. Albumin
1754. In course of long-term treatment of an infectious patient with penicillin, the pathogen transformed into the L-form. What changes occur in the pathogen cell in case of L-transformation?
*a. Absence of a cell wall
b. Absence of flagella
c. Absence of a capsule
d. Absence of a spore
e. Absence of inclusions
1755. In course of long-term treatment of an infectious patient with penicillin, the pathogen transformed into the L-form. What changes occur in the pathogen cell in case of L-transformation?
a. Absence of a spore
b. Absence of flagella
*c. Absence of a cell wall
d. Absence of a capsule
e. Absence of inclusions
1756. In course of long-term treatment of an infectious patient with penicillin, the pathogen transformed into the L-form. What changes occur in the pathogen cell in case of L-transformation?
a. Absence of inclusions
*b. Absence of a cell wall
c. Absence of a capsule
d. Absence of flagella
e. Absence of a spore
1757. In dental practice liquid dosage forms that contain camphor and chloralhydrate are used. What phases are in equilibrium in the eutectic point of fusiblity curve of the camphor-chloralhydrate mixture?
*a. Eutectic melt, camphor crystals, chloralhydrate crystals
b. Eutectic melt
c. Eutectic melt, chloralhydrate crystals
d. Eutectic melt, camphor crystals
e. Camphor crystals, chloralhydrate crystals
1758. In dental practice liquid dosage forms that contain camphor and chloralhydrate are used. What phases are in equilibrium in the eutectic point of fusiblity curve of the camphor-chloralhydrate mixture?
a. Eutectic melt
b. Eutectic melt, chloralhydrate crystals
c. Eutectic melt, camphor crystals
*d. Eutectic melt, camphor crystals, chloralhydrate crystals
e. Camphor crystals, chloralhydrate crystals
1759. In dental practice liquid dosage forms that contain camphor and chloralhydrate are used. What phases are in equilibrium in the eutectic point of fusiblity curve of the camphor-chloralhydrate mixture?
a. Eutectic melt, camphor crystals
*b. Eutectic melt, camphor crystals, chloralhydrate crystals
c. Eutectic melt
d. Camphor crystals, chloralhydrate crystals
e. Eutectic melt, chloralhydrate crystals
1760. In gas-liquid chromatography the substances being analyzed are entered into the stream of a carrier gas. This gas must meet the following condition:
a. Affinity for the stationary phase
b. High molecular weight
c. High thermal conductivity
*d. Inert to the stationary phase and the substances being analyzed
e. Rate of movement through the column
1761. In gas-liquid chromatography the substances being analyzed are entered into the stream of a carrier gas. This gas must meet the following condition:
a. Rate of movement through the column
b. High thermal conductivity
*c. Inert to the stationary phase and the substances being analyzed
d. High molecular weight
e. Affinity for the stationary phase
1762. In gas-liquid chromatography the substances being analyzed are entered into the stream of a carrier gas. This gas must meet the following condition:
a. Rate of movement through the column
b. High thermal conductivity
c. Affinity for the stationary phase
d. High molecular weight
*e. Inert to the stationary phase and the substances being analyzed
1763. In hot weather on the leaf tips of Tilia cordata and on the crenations along its leaf edges, drops of liquid are released through the water stomata. Name the structures located on the plant leaves, through which  liquid water can be passively released:
*a. Hydatodes
b. Osmophores
c. Nectaries
d. Glandules
e. Hydropotes
1764. In hot weather on the leaf tips of Tilia cordata and on the crenations along its leaf edges, drops of liquid are released through the water stomata. Name the structures located on the plant leaves, through which  liquid water can be passively released:
a. Hydropotes
b. Nectaries
c. Osmophores
*d. Hydatodes
e. Glandules
1765. In hot weather on the leaf tips of Tilia cordata and on the crenations along its leaf edges, drops of liquid are released through the water stomata. Name the structures located on the plant leaves, through which  liquid water can be passively released:
a. Hydropotes
b. Osmophores
c. Glandules
d. Nectaries
*e. Hydatodes
1766. In human body, thyroxine is an important thyroid hormone. What microelement is necessary to synthesize this hormone?
*a. Iodine
b. Potassium
c. Copper
d. Iron
e. Calcium
1767. In human body, thyroxine is an important thyroid hormone. What microelement is necessary to synthesize this hormone?
a. Calcium
b. Iron
c. Potassium
d. Copper
*e. Iodine
1768. In human body, thyroxine is an important thyroid hormone. What microelement is necessary to synthesize this hormone?
a. Iron
b. Copper
*c. Iodine
d. Potassium
e. Calcium
1769. In hypoxia, lactic acid accumulates in the blood. Name the end product of anaerobic glycolysis.
a. Malate
b. СО_2 and Н_2О
*c. Lactate
d. Oxaloacetate
e. Alanine
1770. In hypoxia, lactic acid accumulates in the blood. Name the end product of anaerobic glycolysis.
a. Malate
b. СО_2 and Н_2О
c. Alanine
d. Oxaloacetate
*e. Lactate
1771. In hypoxia, lactic acid accumulates in the blood. Name the end product of anaerobic glycolysis.
a. СО_2 and Н_2О
*b. Lactate
c. Malate
d. Alanine
e. Oxaloacetate
1772. In iodometry, titrimetric quantitative analysis is used to measure the amount of iodine utilized for the oxidation of a reducing agent or released as a result of iodide oxidation. What salt is used to make an iodide solution for iodometry?
*a. Potassium iodide
b. Lithium iodide
c. Magnesium iodide
d. Sodium iodide
e. Calcium iodide
1773. In iodometry, titrimetric quantitative analysis is used to measure the amount of iodine utilized for the oxidation of a reducing agent or released as a result of iodide oxidation. What salt is used to make an iodide solution for iodometry?
a. Calcium iodide
b. Lithium iodide
c. Sodium iodide
*d. Potassium iodide
e. Magnesium iodide
1774. In iodometry, titrimetric quantitative analysis is used to measure the amount of iodine utilized for the oxidation of a reducing agent or released as a result of iodide oxidation. What salt is used to make an iodide solution for iodometry?
a. Magnesium iodide
*b. Potassium iodide
c. Sodium iodide
d. Lithium iodide
e. Calcium iodide
1775. In medical and pharmaceutical practice the phenomena of adsorption, wetting, and adhesion are regularly observed. Name this group of phenomena:
a. Electrokinetic phenomena
*b. Surface phenomena
c. Optical phenomena
d. Molecular-kinetic phenomena
e. Physico-chemical phenomena
1776. In medical and pharmaceutical practice the phenomena of adsorption, wetting, and adhesion are regularly observed. Name this group of phenomena:
a. Physico-chemical phenomena
b. Molecular-kinetic phenomena
c. Electrokinetic phenomena
d. Optical phenomena
*e. Surface phenomena
1777. In medical and pharmaceutical practice the phenomena of adsorption, wetting, and adhesion are regularly observed. Name this group of phenomena:
a. Physico-chemical phenomena
b. Optical phenomena
c. Electrokinetic phenomena
d. Molecular-kinetic phenomena
*e. Surface phenomena
1778. In medicine, various dosage forms are used: emulsions, foams, powders, etc. that can be classified as disperse systems. What determines the dispersion in such systems?
*a. The degree of the dispersed material  comminution
b. The volume of the continuous medium
c. The mass of the comminuted substance
d. The nature of the dispersed material
e. The shape of the particles
1779. In medicine, various dosage forms are used: emulsions, foams, powders, etc. that can be classified as disperse systems. What determines the dispersion in such systems?
a. The nature of the dispersed material
*b. The degree of the dispersed material  comminution
c. The shape of the particles
d. The volume of the continuous medium
e. The mass of the comminuted substance
1780. In medicine, various dosage forms are used: emulsions, foams, powders, etc. that can be classified as disperse systems. What determines the dispersion in such systems?
a. The shape of the particles
b. The volume of the continuous medium
c. The nature of the dispersed material
d. The mass of the comminuted substance
*e. The degree of the dispersed material  comminution
1781. In microbiology class students have been growing pure bacterial culture. Bacterial inoculation of solid medium was performed to obtain separate visible colonies, resulting in two colonies, R-type and S-type, grown in thermostat after one day of incubation. What properties of microorganisms were described by students?
*a. Cultural
b. Antigenic
c. Tinctorial
d. Biochemical
e. Morphologic
1782. In microbiology class students have been growing pure bacterial culture. Bacterial inoculation of solid medium was performed to obtain separate visible colonies, resulting in two colonies, R-type and S-type, grown in thermostat after one day of incubation. What properties of microorganisms were described by students?
a. Biochemical
*b. Cultural
c. Tinctorial
d. Antigenic
e. Morphologic
1783. In microbiology class students have been growing pure bacterial culture. Bacterial inoculation of solid medium was performed to obtain separate visible colonies, resulting in two colonies, R-type and S-type, grown in thermostat after one day of incubation. What properties of microorganisms were described by students?
a. Morphologic
b. Antigenic
c. Tinctorial
*d. Cultural
e. Biochemical
1784. In microbiology, the Gram method is the main method for bacteria differentiation by means of staining. In this method, bacteria differentiation into Gram-positive and Gram-negative ones is based on their:
a. Cell size
b. Chemical composition of the capsule
*c. Cell wall structure
d. Presence of ribosomes
e. Cytoplasmic membrane structure
1785. In microbiology, the Gram method is the main method for bacteria differentiation by means of staining. In this method, bacteria differentiation into Gram-positive and Gram-negative ones is based on their:
a. Cytoplasmic membrane structure
b. Chemical composition of the capsule
c. Cell size
*d. Cell wall structure
e. Presence of ribosomes
1786. In microbiology, the Gram method is the main method for bacteria differentiation by means of staining. In this method, bacteria differentiation into Gram-positive and Gram-negative ones is based on their:
a. Presence of ribosomes
b. Cell size
c. Chemical composition of the capsule
*d. Cell wall structure
e. Cytoplasmic membrane structure
1787. In nitritometry, titrant is a 0.1 M solution of sodium nitrite that is prepared as a secondary standard solution. What acid is used to determine the exact concentration of sodium nitrite?
*a. Sulfanilic
b. Acetic
c. Sulfuric
d. Oxalic
e. Hydrochloric
1788. In nitritometry, titrant is a 0.1 M solution of sodium nitrite that is prepared as a secondary standard solution. What acid is used to determine the exact concentration of sodium nitrite?
*a. Sulfanilic
b. Hydrochloric
c. Acetic
d. Sulfuric
e. Oxalic
1789. In nitritometry, titrant is a 0.1 M solution of sodium nitrite that is prepared as a secondary standard solution. What acid is used to determine the exact concentration of sodium nitrite?
*a. Sulfanilic
b. Oxalic
c. Hydrochloric
d. Acetic
e. Sulfuric
1790. In order to bind hydrogen ions with tartaric acid during identification of potassium ions the following solution is used:
*a. Sodium acetate
b. Hydrochloric acid
c. Sodium hydroxide
d. Sulfuric acid
e. Ammonia
1791. In order to bind hydrogen ions with tartaric acid during identification of potassium ions the following solution is used:
a. Hydrochloric acid
b. Sodium hydroxide
c. Sulfuric acid
d. Ammonia
*e. Sodium acetate
1792. In order to bind hydrogen ions with tartaric acid during identification of potassium ions the following solution is used:
a. Sodium hydroxide
b. Hydrochloric acid
c. Sulfuric acid
*d. Sodium acetate
e. Ammonia
1793. In order to identify the cations of zinc (II) an analytical chemist used the reagent solution of hexacyanoferrate (II) potassium (Pharmacopeia reaction). What colour would the precipitate have in this reaction?
*a. White
b. Yellow
c. Black
d. Red
e. Green
1794. In order to identify the cations of zinc (II) an analytical chemist used the reagent solution of hexacyanoferrate (II) potassium (Pharmacopeia reaction). What colour would the precipitate have in this reaction?
a. Green
b. Red
c. Yellow
d. Black
*e. White
1795. In order to identify the cations of zinc (II) an analytical chemist used the reagent solution of hexacyanoferrate (II) potassium (Pharmacopeia reaction). What colour would the precipitate have in this reaction?
a. Green
b. Yellow
c. Red
*d. White
e. Black
1796. In permanganatometry, KMnO_4 is used as a titrant. What is the equivalence factor of this compound, if the titration is performed in an acidic medium?
*a. 1/5
b. 1/4
c. 1/3
d. 1/2
e. 1
1797. In permanganatometry, KMnO_4 is used as a titrant. What is the equivalence factor of this compound, if the titration is performed in an acidic medium?
a. 1/4
*b. 1/5
c. 1/3
d. 1
e. 1/2
1798. In permanganatometry, KMnO_4 is used as a titrant. What is the equivalence factor of this compound, if the titration is performed in an acidic medium?
a. 1/4
b. 1/3
c. 1
*d. 1/5
e. 1/2
1799. In pharmaceutical production the oxyethylated derivatives of fatty acid esters (FAEs) are used, which undergo colloid dissolution in sufficiently concentrated solutions. This process is called:
a. Syneresis
b. Colloid protection
c. Synergism
*d. Solubilization
e. Sensitization
1800. In pharmaceutical production the oxyethylated derivatives of fatty acid esters (FAEs) are used, which undergo colloid dissolution in sufficiently concentrated solutions. This process is called:
a. Syneresis
b. Colloid protection
c. Synergism
d. Sensitization
*e. Solubilization
1801. In pharmaceutical production the oxyethylated derivatives of fatty acid esters (FAEs) are used, which undergo colloid dissolution in sufficiently concentrated solutions. This process is called:
a. Syneresis
b. Synergism
c. Sensitization
*d. Solubilization
e. Colloid protection
1802. In pharmaceutical technology, analysis of the phase diagram of systems is of practical importance. What type of equilibrium is characterized by the figurative point on the phase diagram of water?
*a. One-component, three-phase, non-variant
b. One-component, two-phase, non-variant
c. Two-component, one-phase, one-variant
d. One-component, one-phase, non-variant
e. Two-component, two-phase, one-variant
1803. In pharmaceutical technology, analysis of the phase diagram of systems is of practical importance. What type of equilibrium is characterized by the figurative point on the phase diagram of water?
a. One-component, one-phase, non-variant
b. One-component, two-phase, non-variant
c. Two-component, two-phase, one-variant
*d. One-component, three-phase, non-variant
e. Two-component, one-phase, one-variant
1804. In pharmaceutical technology, analysis of the phase diagram of systems is of practical importance. What type of equilibrium is characterized by the figurative point on the phase diagram of water?
a. One-component, one-phase, non-variant
b. Two-component, one-phase, one-variant
c. One-component, two-phase, non-variant
*d. One-component, three-phase, non-variant
e. Two-component, two-phase, one-variant
1805. In pharmacy, extraction is used to extract bioactive substances from herbal raw materials. What law underlies this process?
*a. Distribution law
b. Law of mass action
c. Konovalov's law
d. Ostwald's law
e. Poiseulle's law
1806. In pharmacy, extraction is used to extract bioactive substances from herbal raw materials. What law underlies this process?
a. Law of mass action
*b. Distribution law
c. Poiseulle's law
d. Konovalov's law
e. Ostwald's law
1807. In pharmacy, extraction is used to extract bioactive substances from herbal raw materials. What law underlies this process?
a. Poiseulle's law
*b. Distribution law
c. Ostwald's law
d. Konovalov's law
e. Law of mass action
1808. In pine wood, essential oils accumulate in the passages that inside are lined with a layer of secretory cells. Name these structures:
*a. Schizogenous cavities
b. Non-articulated laticifers
c. Articulated laticifers
d. Glandules
e. Lysigenous cavities
1809. In pine wood, essential oils accumulate in the passages that inside are lined with a layer of secretory cells. Name these structures:
a. Glandules
b. Lysigenous cavities
*c. Schizogenous cavities
d. Non-articulated laticifers
e. Articulated laticifers
1810. In pine wood, essential oils accumulate in the passages that inside are lined with a layer of secretory cells. Name these structures:
a. Non-articulated laticifers
b. Articulated laticifers
*c. Schizogenous cavities
d. Glandules
e. Lysigenous cavities
1811. In potentiometric titration the following indicator electrode is used for chloride and borate acids quantitative determination in their mixture:
a. Calomel
b. Silver
*c. Glass
d. Platinum
e. Silver-chlorine
1812. In potentiometric titration the following indicator electrode is used for chloride and borate acids quantitative determination in their mixture:
a. Platinum
b. Calomel
c. Silver
*d. Glass
e. Silver-chlorine
1813. In potentiometric titration the following indicator electrode is used for chloride and borate acids quantitative determination in their mixture:
a. Silver-chlorine
b. Platinum
c. Calomel
*d. Glass
e. Silver
1814. In practical classes the group of students have to explore the chemical structure of glucose molecule. Which of the following suits most for simultaneous detection of aldehyde group and glycol fragment in previously mentioned molecule?
*a. Cu(OH)_2
b. Br_2
c. AlCl_3
d. FeCl_3
e. KMnO_4
1815. In practical classes the group of students have to explore the chemical structure of glucose molecule. Which of the following suits most for simultaneous detection of aldehyde group and glycol fragment in previously mentioned molecule?
a. FeCl_3
*b. Cu(OH)_2
c. KMnO_4
d. Br_2
e. AlCl_3
1816. In practical classes the group of students have to explore the chemical structure of glucose molecule. Which of the following suits most for simultaneous detection of aldehyde group and glycol fragment in previously mentioned molecule?
a. KMnO_4
*b. Cu(OH)_2
c. Br_2
d. FeCl_3
e. AlCl_3
1817. In qualitative analysis, a reaction with an iodine solution is used to detect arsenite ions. What is used to create the medium for this purpose?
a. Acetic acid solution
b. Nitric acid solution
*c. Saturated solution of sodium hydrogencarbonate
d. Sulfuric acid solution
e. Ammonia solution
1818. In qualitative analysis, a reaction with an iodine solution is used to detect arsenite ions. What is used to create the medium for this purpose?
a. Ammonia solution
*b. Saturated solution of sodium hydrogencarbonate
c. Acetic acid solution
d. Sulfuric acid solution
e. Nitric acid solution
1819. In qualitative analysis, a reaction with an iodine solution is used to detect arsenite ions. What is used to create the medium for this purpose?
a. Nitric acid solution
b. Ammonia solution
c. Acetic acid solution
*d. Saturated solution of sodium hydrogencarbonate
e. Sulfuric acid solution
1820. In recent decades, the etiological role of viruses in the occurrence of cervical cancer has been proven. Name these viruses.
a. Adenoviruses
*b. Human papillomaviruses
c. Herpes simplex virus type 2
d. HTLV-1 and HTLV-2
e. Cytomegalovirus
1821. In recent decades, the etiological role of viruses in the occurrence of cervical cancer has been proven. Name these viruses.
a. Cytomegalovirus
*b. Human papillomaviruses
c. HTLV-1 and HTLV-2
d. Herpes simplex virus type 2
e. Adenoviruses
1822. In recent decades, the etiological role of viruses in the occurrence of cervical cancer has been proven. Name these viruses.
a. HTLV-1 and HTLV-2
b. Adenoviruses
c. Cytomegalovirus
*d. Human papillomaviruses
e. Herpes simplex virus type 2
1823. In spring a perennial plant of Asteraceae family produces floral shoots with gloden-yellow flowers. After blossom-fall, shoots with large leaves appear. Name this plant:
a. Datura stramonium
b. Potentilla erecta
c. Petroselinum crispum
d. Ніреriсum perforatum
*e. Tussilago farfara
1824. In spring a perennial plant of Asteraceae family produces floral shoots with gloden-yellow flowers. After blossom-fall, shoots with large leaves appear. Name this plant:
a. Petroselinum crispum
*b. Tussilago farfara
c. Datura stramonium
d. Potentilla erecta
e. Ніреriсum perforatum
1825. In spring a perennial plant of Asteraceae family produces floral shoots with gloden-yellow flowers. After blossom-fall, shoots with large leaves appear. Name this plant:
a. Potentilla erecta
b. Datura stramonium
*c. Tussilago farfara
d. Petroselinum crispum
e. Ніреriсum perforatum
1826. In the age of 5 months the child had measles antibodies in the blood. By the age of 1 year these antibodies disappeared from the child's blood. Why were these antibodies present in the child's blood?
*a. Acquired natural passive immunity
b. Innate immunity
c. Artificial immunity
d. Acquired natural active immunity
e. Non-specific resistance
1827. In the age of 5 months the child had measles antibodies in the blood. By the age of 1 year these antibodies disappeared from the child's blood. Why were these antibodies present in the child's blood?
a. Acquired natural active immunity
b. Non-specific resistance
c. Innate immunity
d. Artificial immunity
*e. Acquired natural passive immunity
1828. In the age of 5 months the child had measles antibodies in the blood. By the age of 1 year these antibodies disappeared from the child's blood. Why were these antibodies present in the child's blood?
a. Innate immunity
b. Non-specific resistance
c. Acquired natural active immunity
d. Artificial immunity
*e. Acquired natural passive immunity
1829. In the course of bronchitis pharmacotherapy a patient has developed dyspeptic disorders, photodermatitis and hepatic failure. What drug can cause such disorders?
a. Acetylcysteine
b. Paracetamol
*c. Doxycycline
d. Codeine phosphate
e. Ascorbic acid
1830. In the course of bronchitis pharmacotherapy a patient has developed dyspeptic disorders, photodermatitis and hepatic failure. What drug can cause such disorders?
a. Codeine phosphate
b. Paracetamol
c. Acetylcysteine
*d. Doxycycline
e. Ascorbic acid
1831. In the course of bronchitis pharmacotherapy a patient has developed dyspeptic disorders, photodermatitis and hepatic failure. What drug can cause such disorders?
a. Paracetamol
b. Acetylcysteine
c. Ascorbic acid
d. Codeine phosphate
*e. Doxycycline
1832. In the dentist's office, a patient developed asphyxia caused by aspiration of a small instrument. What type of respiratory failure is observed in this case?
*a. Obstructive
b. Dysregulatory
c. Restrictive
d. Diffusion
e. Perfusion
1833. In the dentist's office, a patient developed asphyxia caused by aspiration of a small instrument. What type of respiratory failure is observed in this case?
a. Diffusion
b. Dysregulatory
c. Perfusion
*d. Obstructive
e. Restrictive
1834. In the dentist's office, a patient developed asphyxia caused by aspiration of a small instrument. What type of respiratory failure is observed in this case?
a. Diffusion
b. Perfusion
c. Dysregulatory
d. Restrictive
*e. Obstructive
1835. In the drug manufacture it is necessary to follow a complex of measures aimed at prevention of their microbial contamination. What is the name of this complex of measures?
a. Deratisation
*b. Asepsis
c. Antisepsis
d. Disinfection
e. Sterilization
1836. In the drug manufacture it is necessary to follow a complex of measures aimed at prevention of their microbial contamination. What is the name of this complex of measures?
a. Deratisation
*b. Asepsis
c. Sterilization
d. Antisepsis
e. Disinfection
1837. In the drug manufacture it is necessary to follow a complex of measures aimed at prevention of their microbial contamination. What is the name of this complex of measures?
a. Deratisation
b. Antisepsis
c. Sterilization
*d. Asepsis
e. Disinfection
1838. In the epidemiology of certain diseases, a great attention must be paid to fleas as disease carriers. Particularly, the fleas play a major role in the spread of:
a. Anthrax
*b. Plague
c. Typhus
d. Relapsing fever
e. Leptospirosis
1839. In the epidemiology of certain diseases, a great attention must be paid to fleas as disease carriers. Particularly, the fleas play a major role in the spread of:
a. Anthrax
b. Typhus
c. Leptospirosis
*d. Plague
e. Relapsing fever
1840. In the epidemiology of certain diseases, a great attention must be paid to fleas as disease carriers. Particularly, the fleas play a major role in the spread of:
a. Relapsing fever
*b. Plague
c. Leptospirosis
d. Anthrax
e. Typhus
1841. In the patient's blood plasma there are high levels of low-density and very low-density lipoproteins. These changes can indicate the following pathology:
*a. Atherosclerosis
b. Jaundice
c. Leukaemia
d. Arthrosis
e. Gout
1842. In the patient's blood plasma there are high levels of low-density and very low-density lipoproteins. These changes can indicate the following pathology:
a. Gout
*b. Atherosclerosis
c. Arthrosis
d. Jaundice
e. Leukaemia
1843. In the patient's blood plasma there are high levels of low-density and very low-density lipoproteins. These changes can indicate the following pathology:
a. Gout
*b. Atherosclerosis
c. Leukaemia
d. Jaundice
e. Arthrosis
1844. In the patient's blood, increased activity of AST, LDH1, LDH2, and CPK was detected. In what organ is a pathological process possible in this case?
*a. Heart muscle
b. Skeletal muscles
c. Kidneys
d. Adrenal glands
e. Liver
1845. In the patient's blood, increased activity of AST, LDH1, LDH2, and CPK was detected. In what organ is a pathological process possible in this case?
a. Adrenal glands
b. Kidneys
c. Skeletal muscles
*d. Heart muscle
e. Liver
1846. In the patient's blood, increased activity of AST, LDH1, LDH2, and CPK was detected. In what organ is a pathological process possible in this case?
a. Skeletal muscles
b. Adrenal glands
c. Kidneys
*d. Heart muscle
e. Liver
1847. In the postoperative period, the patient was receiving an antibiotic. Over time, the patient started complaining of impaired hearing and vestibular disorders. What group of antibiotics has such side effects?
*a. Aminoglycosides
b. Tetracyclines
c. Macrolides
d. Penicillins
e. Cephalosporins
1848. In the postoperative period, the patient was receiving an antibiotic. Over time, the patient started complaining of impaired hearing and vestibular disorders. What group of antibiotics has such side effects?
a. Macrolides
b. Tetracyclines
c. Cephalosporins
*d. Aminoglycosides
e. Penicillins
1849. In the postoperative period, the patient was receiving an antibiotic. Over time, the patient started complaining of impaired hearing and vestibular disorders. What group of antibiotics has such side effects?
a. Penicillins
b. Cephalosporins
c. Tetracyclines
*d. Aminoglycosides
e. Macrolides
1850. In the practice of harvesting herbal raw material of Asteraceae family the term "flowers" means both individual flowers and inflorescences. However, the notion of "flowers" is botanically correct only for:
*a. Centaurea cyanus
b. Echinops ritro
c. Gnaphalium uliginosum
d. Arnica montana
e. Bidens tripartita
1851. In the practice of harvesting herbal raw material of Asteraceae family the term "flowers" means both individual flowers and inflorescences. However, the notion of "flowers" is botanically correct only for:
a. Bidens tripartita
b. Gnaphalium uliginosum
c. Echinops ritro
*d. Centaurea cyanus
e. Arnica montana
1852. In the practice of harvesting herbal raw material of Asteraceae family the term "flowers" means both individual flowers and inflorescences. However, the notion of "flowers" is botanically correct only for:
a. Echinops ritro
*b. Centaurea cyanus
c. Bidens tripartita
d. Gnaphalium uliginosum
e. Arnica montana
1853. In the process of breathing oxygen joins with hemoglobin in lungs and makes up oxyhemoglobin as a result, which leads to release of protons from hemoglobin and production of carbonic acid. What enzyme catalyzes further transformation of carbonic acid into carbon dioxide that is exhaled from lungs?
*a. Carbonic anhydrase
b. Pyruvate kinase
c. Heme oxygenase (haem oxygenase)
d. Lipase
e. Catalase
1854. In the process of breathing oxygen joins with hemoglobin in lungs and makes up oxyhemoglobin as a result, which leads to release of protons from hemoglobin and production of carbonic acid. What enzyme catalyzes further transformation of carbonic acid into carbon dioxide that is exhaled from lungs?
*a. Carbonic anhydrase
b. Pyruvate kinase
c. Lipase
d. Heme oxygenase (haem oxygenase)
e. Catalase
1855. In the process of breathing oxygen joins with hemoglobin in lungs and makes up oxyhemoglobin as a result, which leads to release of protons from hemoglobin and production of carbonic acid. What enzyme catalyzes further transformation of carbonic acid into carbon dioxide that is exhaled from lungs?
a. Heme oxygenase (haem oxygenase)
*b. Carbonic anhydrase
c. Pyruvate kinase
d. Catalase
e. Lipase
1856. In the process of coagulation by mixtures of different electrolytes, they seem to counteract each other's effect. Name this phenomenon:
*a. Antagonism
b. Sedimentation
c. Synergism
d. Mutual coagulation
e. Additivity
1857. In the process of coagulation by mixtures of different electrolytes, they seem to counteract each other's effect. Name this phenomenon:
a. Mutual coagulation
*b. Antagonism
c. Sedimentation
d. Synergism
e. Additivity
1858. In the process of coagulation by mixtures of different electrolytes, they seem to counteract each other's effect. Name this phenomenon:
a. Mutual coagulation
b. Sedimentation
*c. Antagonism
d. Additivity
e. Synergism
1859. In the process of conductometric titration of HCl and CH_3COOH acids mixture 0,1 М solution of NaOH is used to measure:
*a. Electrical conduction in solution
b. pH of medium
c. Rotation angle of polarized light plane
d. Potential difference
e. Refractive index
1860. In the process of conductometric titration of HCl and CH_3COOH acids mixture 0,1 М solution of NaOH is used to measure:
*a. Electrical conduction in solution
b. pH of medium
c. Rotation angle of polarized light plane
d. Refractive index
e. Potential difference
1861. In the process of conductometric titration of HCl and CH_3COOH acids mixture 0,1 М solution of NaOH is used to measure:
a. pH of medium
*b. Electrical conduction in solution
c. Rotation angle of polarized light plane
d. Refractive index
e. Potential difference
1862. In the process of manufacturing live vaccines, the biofactories dry the bacteria and viruses in vacuum at low temperatures, to ensure stability and long shelf-life of the vaccines. Name this method:
a. Photoreactivation
b. Tyndalization
c. Sublimation
d. Sterilization
*e. Lyophilization
1863. In the process of manufacturing live vaccines, the biofactories dry the bacteria and viruses in vacuum at low temperatures, to ensure stability and long shelf-life of the vaccines. Name this method:
a. Sterilization
b. Sublimation
c. Tyndalization
*d. Lyophilization
e. Photoreactivation
1864. In the process of manufacturing live vaccines, the biofactories dry the bacteria and viruses in vacuum at low temperatures, to ensure stability and long shelf-life of the vaccines. Name this method:
a. Sublimation
b. Photoreactivation
c. Sterilization
d. Tyndalization
*e. Lyophilization
1865. In the process of silver cations identification reaction HCl and then ammonia solution have been added to the solution. What compound has been produced as a result?
a. [Ag_2(NH_3)_3]Cl
b. AgCl
c. [Ag(NH_3)_3]Cl
*d. [Ag(NH_3)_2]Cl
e. AgOH
1866. In the process of silver cations identification reaction HCl and then ammonia solution have been added to the solution. What compound has been produced as a result?
a. [Ag_2(NH_3)_3]Cl
b. [Ag(NH_3)_3]Cl
c. AgCl
d. AgOH
*e. [Ag(NH_3)_2]Cl
1867. In the process of silver cations identification reaction HCl and then ammonia solution have been added to the solution. What compound has been produced as a result?
a. [Ag_2(NH_3)_3]Cl
b. [Ag(NH_3)_3]Cl
c. AgOH
d. AgCl
*e. [Ag(NH_3)_2]Cl
1868. In the process of systematic analysis of a cation mixture, iron(III) cations can be determined using the fractional method. What reagent is used for this purpose?
*a. Potassium hexacyanoferrate(II)
b. Sodium dihydrogen phosphate
c. Potassium chloride
d. Hydrochloric acid
e. Nitric acid
1869. In the process of systematic analysis of a cation mixture, iron(III) cations can be determined using the fractional method. What reagent is used for this purpose?
a. Potassium chloride
b. Hydrochloric acid
c. Sodium dihydrogen phosphate
*d. Potassium hexacyanoferrate(II)
e. Nitric acid
1870. In the process of systematic analysis of a cation mixture, iron(III) cations can be determined using the fractional method. What reagent is used for this purpose?
a. Sodium dihydrogen phosphate
b. Potassium chloride
c. Nitric acid
*d. Potassium hexacyanoferrate(II)
e. Hydrochloric acid
1871. In the process of systematic analysis there is a need to separate PbSO_4 from mixture of the 3rd analytical group cation sulphates. Which of the following suits most towards this end?
a. Processing precipitate with acetate acid solution
*b. Processing precipitate with 30% ammonium acetate solution
c. Processing precipitate with ammonia solution
d. Precipitate recrystallization
e. Processing precipitate with concentrated sulfate acid
1872. In the process of systematic analysis there is a need to separate PbSO_4 from mixture of the 3rd analytical group cation sulphates. Which of the following suits most towards this end?
a. Processing precipitate with acetate acid solution
b. Precipitate recrystallization
c. Processing precipitate with concentrated sulfate acid
d. Processing precipitate with ammonia solution
*e. Processing precipitate with 30% ammonium acetate solution
1873. In the process of systematic analysis there is a need to separate PbSO_4 from mixture of the 3rd analytical group cation sulphates. Which of the following suits most towards this end?
a. Processing precipitate with concentrated sulfate acid
b. Precipitate recrystallization
c. Processing precipitate with ammonia solution
d. Processing precipitate with acetate acid solution
*e. Processing precipitate with 30% ammonium acetate solution
1874. In the qualitative analysis which involves precipitation of sulphates of the third analytical group cations (Ca^2+, Sr^2+, Ba^2+) the solubility of sulphates can be reduced by adding:
*a. Ethyl alcohol
b. Chloroform
c. Amyl alcohol
d. Benzene
e. Distilled water
1875. In the qualitative analysis which involves precipitation of sulphates of the third analytical group cations (Ca^2+, Sr^2+, Ba^2+) the solubility of sulphates can be reduced by adding:
a. Benzene
b. Distilled water
*c. Ethyl alcohol
d. Chloroform
e. Amyl alcohol
1876. In the qualitative analysis which involves precipitation of sulphates of the third analytical group cations (Ca^2+, Sr^2+, Ba^2+) the solubility of sulphates can be reduced by adding:
a. Chloroform
*b. Ethyl alcohol
c. Distilled water
d. Benzene
e. Amyl alcohol
1877. In what taxonomic division is the gametophyte predominant over the sporophyte during the plant's life cycle?
a. Lycopodiophyta
b. Magnoliophyta
c. Polypodiophyta
d. Pynophyta
*e. Bryophyta
1878. In what taxonomic division is the gametophyte predominant over the sporophyte during the plant's life cycle?
a. Magnoliophyta
b. Pynophyta
*c. Bryophyta
d. Lycopodiophyta
e. Polypodiophyta
1879. In what taxonomic division is the gametophyte predominant over the sporophyte during the plant's life cycle?
a. Magnoliophyta
b. Pynophyta
*c. Bryophyta
d. Polypodiophyta
e. Lycopodiophyta
1880. Increased concentration of active oxygen forms is a mechanism of pathogenesis in a number of diseases. To prevent this process, antioxidants are prescribed. Select an antioxidant from the list below:
a. Calciferol
b. Cobalamine
*c. alpha-tocopherol
d. Glicerol
e. Glucose
1881. Increased concentration of active oxygen forms is a mechanism of pathogenesis in a number of diseases. To prevent this process, antioxidants are prescribed. Select an antioxidant from the list below:
a. Calciferol
b. Glucose
c. Glicerol
*d. alpha-tocopherol
e. Cobalamine
1882. Increased concentration of active oxygen forms is a mechanism of pathogenesis in a number of diseases. To prevent this process, antioxidants are prescribed. Select an antioxidant from the list below:
a. Cobalamine
b. Glicerol
c. Calciferol
d. Glucose
*e. alpha-tocopherol
1883. Indicator microorganisms are being analyzed in the process of sanitary microbiological assessment of the environment, food, water, and commodities. Quantitative indicators of pollution are being measured, as well as the presence of certain microbial species. What value characterizes total microbial contamination in 1 gram of a solid substance or in 1 milliliter of a liquid?
*a. Microbial count
b. Perfringens titer
c. Coli index
d. Perfringens index
e. Coli titer
1884. Indicator microorganisms are being analyzed in the process of sanitary microbiological assessment of the environment, food, water, and commodities. Quantitative indicators of pollution are being measured, as well as the presence of certain microbial species. What value characterizes total microbial contamination in 1 gram of a solid substance or in 1 milliliter of a liquid?
a. Coli titer
*b. Microbial count
c. Perfringens index
d. Perfringens titer
e. Coli index
1885. Indicator microorganisms are being analyzed in the process of sanitary microbiological assessment of the environment, food, water, and commodities. Quantitative indicators of pollution are being measured, as well as the presence of certain microbial species. What value characterizes total microbial contamination in 1 gram of a solid substance or in 1 milliliter of a liquid?
a. Coli titer
b. Coli index
c. Perfringens index
d. Perfringens titer
*e. Microbial count
1886. Inheritable genetic disorders can result in disturbed enzyme synthesis in the human body. What enzyme deficiency results in disturbed break-up of lactose:
a. Lipase
b. Maltase
*c. Lactase
d. Peptidase
e. Invertase
1887. Inheritable genetic disorders can result in disturbed enzyme synthesis in the human body. What enzyme deficiency results in disturbed break-up of lactose:
a. Peptidase
*b. Lactase
c. Maltase
d. Invertase
e. Lipase
1888. Inheritable genetic disorders can result in disturbed enzyme synthesis in the human body. What enzyme deficiency results in disturbed break-up of lactose:
a. Peptidase
b. Lipase
c. Maltase
d. Invertase
*e. Lactase
1889. Inhibitors of a certain enzyme from amines metabolism are used to treat depression. What enzyme is inhibited to achieve this effect?
a. Formylkynureninase (Arylformamidase)
b. Acetylcholinesterase
*c. Monoamine oxidase with flavine adenine dinucleotide
d. Kynurenine-3-hydroxylase
e. Lactate dehydrogenase
1890. Inhibitors of a certain enzyme from amines metabolism are used to treat depression. What enzyme is inhibited to achieve this effect?
a. Kynurenine-3-hydroxylase
*b. Monoamine oxidase with flavine adenine dinucleotide
c. Formylkynureninase (Arylformamidase)
d. Acetylcholinesterase
e. Lactate dehydrogenase
1891. Inhibitors of a certain enzyme from amines metabolism are used to treat depression. What enzyme is inhibited to achieve this effect?
a. Lactate dehydrogenase
b. Formylkynureninase (Arylformamidase)
c. Kynurenine-3-hydroxylase
*d. Monoamine oxidase with flavine adenine dinucleotide
e. Acetylcholinesterase
1892. Insulin production in beta-cells involves many substances. What substance gives the main signal for insulin synthesis when its concentration changes?
a. Hemoglobin
b. Urea
c. Heparin
*d. Glucose
e. Carbon dioxide
1893. Insulin production in beta-cells involves many substances. What substance gives the main signal for insulin synthesis when its concentration changes?
a. Heparin
b. Hemoglobin
c. Urea
*d. Glucose
e. Carbon dioxide
1894. Insulin production in beta-cells involves many substances. What substance gives the main signal for insulin synthesis when its concentration changes?
a. Urea
*b. Glucose
c. Heparin
d. Carbon dioxide
e. Hemoglobin
1895. Integumentary tissue of roots consists of cells with thin cellulose mebranes and protuberances - root hairs. This tissue is:
a. Periderm
b. Phelloderm
c. Plerome
*d. Epiblema
e. Periblem
1896. Integumentary tissue of roots consists of cells with thin cellulose mebranes and protuberances - root hairs. This tissue is:
a. Periderm
b. Plerome
c. Periblem
d. Phelloderm
*e. Epiblema
1897. Integumentary tissue of roots consists of cells with thin cellulose mebranes and protuberances - root hairs. This tissue is:
a. Plerome
*b. Epiblema
c. Periderm
d. Phelloderm
e. Periblem
1898. Interaction between dispersed phase and dispersion medium is different for different systems. If dispersed phase has low interaction with medium, the system is called:
a. Bound disperse
b. Free disperse
c. Hydrophilic
*d. Lyophobic
e. Lyophilic
1899. Interaction between dispersed phase and dispersion medium is different for different systems. If dispersed phase has low interaction with medium, the system is called:
a. Hydrophilic
b. Bound disperse
*c. Lyophobic
d. Lyophilic
e. Free disperse
1900. Interaction between dispersed phase and dispersion medium is different for different systems. If dispersed phase has low interaction with medium, the system is called:
a. Hydrophilic
b. Free disperse
c. Bound disperse
*d. Lyophobic
e. Lyophilic
1901. Interferons have the properties of antiviral antibiotics and natural antitumor factors, which is why they are widely used in medical practice. Their protective effects are realized by influencing a certain stage of protein biosynthesis. Name this stage.
a. Transcription termination
b. Translation elongation
c. Transcription initiation
*d. Translation initiation
e. Translation termination
1902. Interferons have the properties of antiviral antibiotics and natural antitumor factors, which is why they are widely used in medical practice. Their protective effects are realized by influencing a certain stage of protein biosynthesis. Name this stage.
a. Translation elongation
b. Translation termination
c. Transcription termination
d. Transcription initiation
*e. Translation initiation
1903. Interferons have the properties of antiviral antibiotics and natural antitumor factors, which is why they are widely used in medical practice. Their protective effects are realized by influencing a certain stage of protein biosynthesis. Name this stage.
a. Translation termination
b. Translation elongation
c. Transcription termination
*d. Translation initiation
e. Transcription initiation
1904. Interleukin-1 is one of the secondary pyrogens in a fever. What cells are the main producers of this pyrogen?
*a. Macrophages
b. Eosinophils
c. Lymphocytes
d. Tissue basophils
e. Platelets
1905. Interleukin-1 is one of the secondary pyrogens in a fever. What cells are the main producers of this pyrogen?
*a. Macrophages
b. Eosinophils
c. Platelets
d. Tissue basophils
e. Lymphocytes
1906. Interleukin-1 is one of the secondary pyrogens in a fever. What cells are the main producers of this pyrogen?
a. Lymphocytes
*b. Macrophages
c. Tissue basophils
d. Eosinophils
e. Platelets
1907. Introduction of immune preparation allows to form artificial acquired immunity. What preparation of those listed below is used to form artificial passive immunity?
a. BCG vaccine
b. Choleragen-anatoxin
c. DPT vaccine
*d. Antitetanus serum
e. Brucellosis vaccine
1908. Introduction of immune preparation allows to form artificial acquired immunity. What preparation of those listed below is used to form artificial passive immunity?
a. Choleragen-anatoxin
b. BCG vaccine
c. Brucellosis vaccine
d. DPT vaccine
*e. Antitetanus serum
1909. Introduction of immune preparation allows to form artificial acquired immunity. What preparation of those listed below is used to form artificial passive immunity?
a. DPT vaccine
b. Choleragen-anatoxin
c. Brucellosis vaccine
*d. Antitetanus serum
e. BCG vaccine
1910. Investigation of bacterial contamination of indoor air in a pharmacy takes into account the total number of microorganisms present in a certain air volume, as well as qualitative content of indoor air microflora. Name the sanitary-indicative microorganisms for indoor air:
a. Chromobacterium
*b. Staphylococcus and streptococcus
c. Fungi and yeasts
d. Sarcina
e. Colibacillus
1911. Investigation of bacterial contamination of indoor air in a pharmacy takes into account the total number of microorganisms present in a certain air volume, as well as qualitative content of indoor air microflora. Name the sanitary-indicative microorganisms for indoor air:
a. Chromobacterium
b. Sarcina
c. Fungi and yeasts
*d. Staphylococcus and streptococcus
e. Colibacillus
1912. Investigation of bacterial contamination of indoor air in a pharmacy takes into account the total number of microorganisms present in a certain air volume, as well as qualitative content of indoor air microflora. Name the sanitary-indicative microorganisms for indoor air:
a. Fungi and yeasts
*b. Staphylococcus and streptococcus
c. Colibacillus
d. Chromobacterium
e. Sarcina
1913. Iodimetry involves use of standard solutions of iodine and Na_2S_2O_3. What substance is used to standardize the sodium thiosulfate solution?
a. K_2CO_3
b. As_2O_3
c. N_2B_4O_7
*d. K_2Cr_2O_7
e. NaCl
1914. Iodimetry involves use of standard solutions of iodine and Na_2S_2O_3. What substance is used to standardize the sodium thiosulfate solution?
a. N_2B_4O_7
b. K_2CO_3
c. As_2O_3
*d. K_2Cr_2O_7
e. NaCl
1915. Iodimetry involves use of standard solutions of iodine and Na_2S_2O_3. What substance is used to standardize the sodium thiosulfate solution?
a. N_2B_4O_7
b. NaCl
*c. K_2Cr_2O_7
d. K_2CO_3
e. As_2O_3
1916. Ion-exchange adsorption is widely used for water softening and demineralization. Through what ionite columns should the water be passed for its demineralization?
*a. Through the cationite in the RH-form, and then through the anionite in the ROH-form
b. Through the cationite in the RK-form, and then through the anionite in the ROH-form
c. Through the cationite in the RH-form, and then through the cationite in the RK-form
d. Through the anionite in the R2SO4-form, and then through the cationite in the ROH-form
e. Through the anionite in the ROH-form, and then through the cationite in the R2Ca-form
1917. Ion-exchange adsorption is widely used for water softening and demineralization. Through what ionite columns should the water be passed for its demineralization?
a. Through the anionite in the R2SO4-form, and then through the cationite in the ROH-form
b. Through the cationite in the RH-form, and then through the cationite in the RK-form
c. Through the cationite in the RK-form, and then through the anionite in the ROH-form
d. Through the anionite in the ROH-form, and then through the cationite in the R2Ca-form
*e. Through the cationite in the RH-form, and then through the anionite in the ROH-form
1918. Ion-exchange adsorption is widely used for water softening and demineralization. Through what ionite columns should the water be passed for its demineralization?
a. Through the anionite in the ROH-form, and then through the cationite in the R2Ca-form
b. Through the cationite in the RK-form, and then through the anionite in the ROH-form
c. Through the anionite in the R2SO4-form, and then through the cationite in the ROH-form
d. Through the cationite in the RH-form, and then through the cationite in the RK-form
*e. Through the cationite in the RH-form, and then through the anionite in the ROH-form
1919. Isoelectric state of protein molecules depends on the:
a. Mass of the solute
*b. pH of the medium
c. Solution preparation technique
d. Shape of the protein molecule
e. Сoncentration of the solvent
1920. Isoelectric state of protein molecules depends on the:
a. Solution preparation technique
b. Shape of the protein molecule
c. Сoncentration of the solvent
*d. pH of the medium
e. Mass of the solute
1921. Isoelectric state of protein molecules depends on the:
a. Сoncentration of the solvent
b. Shape of the protein molecule
c. Mass of the solute
d. Solution preparation technique
*e. pH of the medium
1922. It can be safely assumed that the infants born from the mothers with the history of measles will not be affected by the measles outbreak during their stay in the maternity ward. What classes of antibodies provide the infants with the resistance to this disease?
a. IgE
b. IgA
*c. IgG
d. IgM
e. IgD
1923. It can be safely assumed that the infants born from the mothers with the history of measles will not be affected by the measles outbreak during their stay in the maternity ward. What classes of antibodies provide the infants with the resistance to this disease?
a. IgE
b. IgM
c. IgD
d. IgA
*e. IgG
1924. It can be safely assumed that the infants born from the mothers with the history of measles will not be affected by the measles outbreak during their stay in the maternity ward. What classes of antibodies provide the infants with the resistance to this disease?
a. IgM
b. IgD
c. IgE
*d. IgG
e. IgA
1925. It is a known fact, that human body in a day synthesizes approximately 80 g of glucose due to gluconeogenesis. What organ performs this process primarily?
a. Heart
b. Stomach
*c. Liver
d. Brain
e. Skeletal muscles
1926. It is a known fact, that human body in a day synthesizes approximately 80 g of glucose due to gluconeogenesis. What organ performs this process primarily?
a. Stomach
b. Brain
c. Heart
d. Skeletal muscles
*e. Liver
1927. It is a known fact, that human body in a day synthesizes approximately 80 g of glucose due to gluconeogenesis. What organ performs this process primarily?
a. Stomach
b. Heart
*c. Liver
d. Skeletal muscles
e. Brain
1928. It is determined that genetic basis of extrachromosomal stability is defined by the elements containing genes that provide for cell resistance to certain drugs, primarily antibiotics. What elements are these?
a. Golgi apparatus
b. Cytoplasm
*c. R-plasmids
d. Nucleoid
e. Mitochondrion
1929. It is determined that genetic basis of extrachromosomal stability is defined by the elements containing genes that provide for cell resistance to certain drugs, primarily antibiotics. What elements are these?
a. Golgi apparatus
b. Cytoplasm
c. Nucleoid
*d. R-plasmids
e. Mitochondrion
1930. It is determined that genetic basis of extrachromosomal stability is defined by the elements containing genes that provide for cell resistance to certain drugs, primarily antibiotics. What elements are these?
a. Golgi apparatus
b. Mitochondrion
c. Nucleoid
d. Cytoplasm
*e. R-plasmids
1931. It is known that heterologous antisera are obtained by means of animal immunization. What complications can arise when they are introduced into human body?
*a. Allergic response
b. Visual impairment
c. Gastrointestinal disorders
d. Sensitivity loss
e. Water-electrolyte imbalance
1932. It is known that heterologous antisera are obtained by means of animal immunization. What complications can arise when they are introduced into human body?
*a. Allergic response
b. Visual impairment
c. Sensitivity loss
d. Gastrointestinal disorders
e. Water-electrolyte imbalance
1933. It is known that heterologous antisera are obtained by means of animal immunization. What complications can arise when they are introduced into human body?
a. Sensitivity loss
b. Gastrointestinal disorders
c. Water-electrolyte imbalance
*d. Allergic response
e. Visual impairment
1934. It is known, that HIV infection leads to severe immunologic disturbances in the body that result in the development of AIDS (acquired immune deficiency syndrome). What cells of the human body are the most susceptible to HIV infection?
a. Endotheliocytes
b. Suppressor T cells
c. Hepatocytes
d. B lymphocytes
*e. T helper cells
1935. It is known, that HIV infection leads to severe immunologic disturbances in the body that result in the development of AIDS (acquired immune deficiency syndrome). What cells of the human body are the most susceptible to HIV infection?
a. Hepatocytes
*b. T helper cells
c. Suppressor T cells
d. B lymphocytes
e. Endotheliocytes
1936. It is known, that HIV infection leads to severe immunologic disturbances in the body that result in the development of AIDS (acquired immune deficiency syndrome). What cells of the human body are the most susceptible to HIV infection?
a. Hepatocytes
b. Suppressor T cells
c. B lymphocytes
d. Endotheliocytes
*e. T helper cells
1937. Jellies and the process of jellification are of great importance in medicine and biology. Name the process of jelly destruction followed by the restoration of its jellified state:
*a. Thixotropy
b. Coacervation
c. Salting-out
d. Coagulation
e. Syneresis
1938. Jellies and the process of jellification are of great importance in medicine and biology. Name the process of jelly destruction followed by the restoration of its jellified state:
a. Coacervation
*b. Thixotropy
c. Salting-out
d. Syneresis
e. Coagulation
1939. Jellies and the process of jellification are of great importance in medicine and biology. Name the process of jelly destruction followed by the restoration of its jellified state:
a. Syneresis
b. Coagulation
c. Salting-out
*d. Thixotropy
e. Coacervation
1940. Jelly is one of the promising dosage forms. Name the process, when the initial structure of a mechanically destroyed jelly spontaneously restores:
*a. Thixotropy
b. Diffusion
c. Stratification
d. Syneresis
e. Gelation
1941. Jelly is one of the promising dosage forms. Name the process, when the initial structure of a mechanically destroyed jelly spontaneously restores:
a. Diffusion
b. Syneresis
c. Gelation
d. Stratification
*e. Thixotropy
1942. Jelly is one of the promising dosage forms. Name the process, when the initial structure of a mechanically destroyed jelly spontaneously restores:
a. Syneresis
b. Diffusion
*c. Thixotropy
d. Gelation
e. Stratification
1943. Koch's bacillus was detected in the sputum of the patient with pulmonary tuberculosis. In this patient tuberculosis bacillus assumes the following role:
*a. Causative agent of the disease
b. Risk factor of the disease
c. Condition hampering the disease development
d. Disease development condition
e. Condition conducive to the disease development
1944. Koch's bacillus was detected in the sputum of the patient with pulmonary tuberculosis. In this patient tuberculosis bacillus assumes the following role:
a. Condition hampering the disease development
b. Disease development condition
*c. Causative agent of the disease
d. Condition conducive to the disease development
e. Risk factor of the disease
1945. Koch's bacillus was detected in the sputum of the patient with pulmonary tuberculosis. In this patient tuberculosis bacillus assumes the following role:
a. Disease development condition
b. Condition conducive to the disease development
c. Risk factor of the disease
*d. Causative agent of the disease
e. Condition hampering the disease development
1946. L-DOPA and its derivatives are used in treatment of Parkinson's disease. What aminoacid is this substance made of?
*a. Tyrosine
b. Glutamate
c. Arginine
d. Asparagine
e. Tryptophan
1947. L-DOPA and its derivatives are used in treatment of Parkinson's disease. What aminoacid is this substance made of?
*a. Tyrosine
b. Glutamate
c. Tryptophan
d. Arginine
e. Asparagine
1948. L-DOPA and its derivatives are used in treatment of Parkinson's disease. What aminoacid is this substance made of?
a. Tryptophan
*b. Tyrosine
c. Glutamate
d. Asparagine
e. Arginine
1949. Laboratories of various specialization use the following method to determine general water hardness of potable water:
a. Acidimetry
*b. Complexometric titration
c. Oxidimetry
d. Alkalimetry
e. Precipitation
1950. Laboratories of various specialization use the following method to determine general water hardness of potable water:
a. Oxidimetry
b. Acidimetry
c. Precipitation
d. Alkalimetry
*e. Complexometric titration
1951. Laboratories of various specialization use the following method to determine general water hardness of potable water:
a. Oxidimetry
b. Precipitation
*c. Complexometric titration
d. Alkalimetry
e. Acidimetry
1952. Leaves damage by mosaic discoloration has been detected at medicinal plantations. What microorganisms are the cause?
a. Plant-pathogenic fungi
*b. Plant-pathogenic viruses
c. Plant-pathogenic bacteria
d. Protozoa
e. Rickettsia
1953. Leaves damage by mosaic discoloration has been detected at medicinal plantations. What microorganisms are the cause?
a. Plant-pathogenic fungi
*b. Plant-pathogenic viruses
c. Plant-pathogenic bacteria
d. Rickettsia
e. Protozoa
1954. Leaves damage by mosaic discoloration has been detected at medicinal plantations. What microorganisms are the cause?
a. Protozoa
b. Rickettsia
c. Plant-pathogenic bacteria
d. Plant-pathogenic fungi
*e. Plant-pathogenic viruses
1955. Leaves of a Lamiaceae family plant are ovate, with a crenate margin, darker on the top than on the bottom, and have a characteristic lemon-like smell. These are the features of the following plant:
*a. Melissa officinalis
b. Mentha piperita
c. Lamium album
d. Leonurus cardiacа
e. Salvia officinalis
1956. Leaves of a Lamiaceae family plant are ovate, with a crenate margin, darker on the top than on the bottom, and have a characteristic lemon-like smell. These are the features of the following plant:
a. Leonurus cardiacа
b. Salvia officinalis
c. Lamium album
d. Mentha piperita
*e. Melissa officinalis
1957. Leaves of a Lamiaceae family plant are ovate, with a crenate margin, darker on the top than on the bottom, and have a characteristic lemon-like smell. These are the features of the following plant:
a. Mentha piperita
b. Leonurus cardiacа
c. Lamium album
d. Salvia officinalis
*e. Melissa officinalis
1958. Lecithin of various origins, being a surfactant compound, is used in food industry as emulsifying agent. What group of biomolecules does it belong to?
*a. Phospholipids
b. Glycolipids
c. Sulfolipid
d. Triacylglycerols (triglycerides)
e. Sterol esters
1959. Lecithin of various origins, being a surfactant compound, is used in food industry as emulsifying agent. What group of biomolecules does it belong to?
*a. Phospholipids
b. Triacylglycerols (triglycerides)
c. Glycolipids
d. Sterol esters
e. Sulfolipid
1960. Lecithin of various origins, being a surfactant compound, is used in food industry as emulsifying agent. What group of biomolecules does it belong to?
a. Glycolipids
b. Triacylglycerols (triglycerides)
c. Sterol esters
d. Sulfolipid
*e. Phospholipids
1961. Lipid digestion requires lipases, emulsifiers, and a slightly alkaline pH. What segment of the gastrointestinal tract provides these conditions?
*a. Duodenum
b. Esophagus
c. Stomach
d. Oral cavity
e. Large intestine
1962. Lipid digestion requires lipases, emulsifiers, and a slightly alkaline pH. What segment of the gastrointestinal tract provides these conditions?
a. Oral cavity
*b. Duodenum
c. Large intestine
d. Stomach
e. Esophagus
1963. Lipid digestion requires lipases, emulsifiers, and a slightly alkaline pH. What segment of the gastrointestinal tract provides these conditions?
a. Stomach
b. Esophagus
*c. Duodenum
d. Large intestine
e. Oral cavity
1964. Lipids are a group of water-insoluble substances of various structure that carry out a number of functions. What lipids form a protective layer over skin, fur, or feathers of animals?
*a. Waxes
b. Cholesterol esters
c. Triglycerides
d. Glycolipids
e. Phospholipids
1965. Lipids are a group of water-insoluble substances of various structure that carry out a number of functions. What lipids form a protective layer over skin, fur, or feathers of animals?
*a. Waxes
b. Triglycerides
c. Glycolipids
d. Cholesterol esters
e. Phospholipids
1966. Lipids are a group of water-insoluble substances of various structure that carry out a number of functions. What lipids form a protective layer over skin, fur, or feathers of animals?
a. Phospholipids
b. Cholesterol esters
c. Glycolipids
d. Triglycerides
*e. Waxes
1967. Liquid dosage forms that contain camphor and chloral hydrate are used in dental practice. What phases are in the state of equilibrium at the eutectic point of the melting point diagram of the camphor-chloral hydrate mixture?
*a. Eutectic melt, camphor crystals, chloral hydrate crystals
b. Eutectic melt, camphor crystals
c. Eutectic melt, chloral hydrate crystals
d. Camphor crystals, chloral hydrate crystals
e. Eutectic melt
1968. Liquid dosage forms that contain camphor and chloral hydrate are used in dental practice. What phases are in the state of equilibrium at the eutectic point of the melting point diagram of the camphor-chloral hydrate mixture?
a. Eutectic melt, camphor crystals
b. Camphor crystals, chloral hydrate crystals
c. Eutectic melt, chloral hydrate crystals
*d. Eutectic melt, camphor crystals, chloral hydrate crystals
e. Eutectic melt
1969. Liquid dosage forms that contain camphor and chloral hydrate are used in dental practice. What phases are in the state of equilibrium at the eutectic point of the melting point diagram of the camphor-chloral hydrate mixture?
a. Eutectic melt, chloral hydrate crystals
*b. Eutectic melt, camphor crystals, chloral hydrate crystals
c. Camphor crystals, chloral hydrate crystals
d. Eutectic melt, camphor crystals
e. Eutectic melt
1970. Long-term taking of sulfonamides has resulted in the patient developing anemia, leukopenia, and thrombocytopenia. What is the mechanism of development of these disorders?
a. Bone marrow stimulation
*b. Inhibition of hematopoiesis in the bone marrow
c. Intensified use of blood elements
d. Destruction of blood elements
e. These disorders have not been caused by the medicines
1971. Long-term taking of sulfonamides has resulted in the patient developing anemia, leukopenia, and thrombocytopenia. What is the mechanism of development of these disorders?
a. Bone marrow stimulation
b. These disorders have not been caused by the medicines
c. Destruction of blood elements
*d. Inhibition of hematopoiesis in the bone marrow
e. Intensified use of blood elements
1972. Long-term taking of sulfonamides has resulted in the patient developing anemia, leukopenia, and thrombocytopenia. What is the mechanism of development of these disorders?
a. Destruction of blood elements
*b. Inhibition of hematopoiesis in the bone marrow
c. Intensified use of blood elements
d. These disorders have not been caused by the medicines
e. Bone marrow stimulation
1973. Long-term use of antibiotics can result in development of dysbiosis. What method can detect intestinal dysbiosis?
*a. Bacteriology
b. Patient interview
c. Allergy testing
d. Gnotobiotic experiments
e. Serology
1974. Long-term use of antibiotics can result in development of dysbiosis. What method can detect intestinal dysbiosis?
a. Allergy testing
b. Patient interview
c. Serology
*d. Bacteriology
e. Gnotobiotic experiments
1975. Long-term use of antibiotics can result in development of dysbiosis. What method can detect intestinal dysbiosis?
a. Serology
b. Allergy testing
c. Patient interview
*d. Bacteriology
e. Gnotobiotic experiments
1976. Main process of ammonia neutralization occurs in the liver. Arginine decomposition reaction that produces urea as a result is catalyzed with arginase. What group of enzymes does arginase belong to?
*a. Hydrolases
b. Synthetases
c. Transferases
d. Isomerases
e. Oxidoreductases
1977. Main process of ammonia neutralization occurs in the liver. Arginine decomposition reaction that produces urea as a result is catalyzed with arginase. What group of enzymes does arginase belong to?
*a. Hydrolases
b. Transferases
c. Oxidoreductases
d. Synthetases
e. Isomerases
1978. Main process of ammonia neutralization occurs in the liver. Arginine decomposition reaction that produces urea as a result is catalyzed with arginase. What group of enzymes does arginase belong to?
a. Synthetases
b. Oxidoreductases
c. Transferases
*d. Hydrolases
e. Isomerases
1979. Malignant tumors have a number of morphological and functional characteristics that differ them from benign ones. What is typical only of malignant tumors?
a. No recurrences
b. Expansive growth
c. Only local influence
d. No metastases
*e. Low degree of cell differentiation
1980. Malignant tumors have a number of morphological and functional characteristics that differ them from benign ones. What is typical only of malignant tumors?
a. No recurrences
b. No metastases
c. Only local influence
*d. Low degree of cell differentiation
e. Expansive growth
1981. Malignant tumors have a number of morphological and functional characteristics that differ them from benign ones. What is typical only of malignant tumors?
a. Only local influence
*b. Low degree of cell differentiation
c. No metastases
d. Expansive growth
e. No recurrences
1982. Mantoux skin test is used to screen school children for infection with Mycobacterium tuberculosis. What testing agent is necessary for this procedure?
a. BCG vaccine
b. Anthraxinum
*c. Tuberculin
d. Brucellin
e. Anti-anthrax vaccine (STI)
1983. Mantoux skin test is used to screen school children for infection with Mycobacterium tuberculosis. What testing agent is necessary for this procedure?
a. BCG vaccine
b. Anti-anthrax vaccine (STI)
c. Anthraxinum
d. Brucellin
*e. Tuberculin
1984. Mantoux skin test is used to screen school children for infection with Mycobacterium tuberculosis. What testing agent is necessary for this procedure?
a. Brucellin
b. Anthraxinum
c. BCG vaccine
*d. Tuberculin
e. Anti-anthrax vaccine (STI)
1985. Many drugs must be manufactured under strictly aseptic conditions. One such possible source of microbiological contamination of drugs is laboratory glassware. What method should be used to sterilize the glassware?
*a. Dry heat
b. Ignition
c. Pasteurization
d. Boiling
e. Tyndallization
1986. Many drugs must be manufactured under strictly aseptic conditions. One such possible source of microbiological contamination of drugs is laboratory glassware. What method should be used to sterilize the glassware?
a. Boiling
b. Ignition
*c. Dry heat
d. Pasteurization
e. Tyndallization
1987. Many drugs must be manufactured under strictly aseptic conditions. One such possible source of microbiological contamination of drugs is laboratory glassware. What method should be used to sterilize the glassware?
a. Boiling
b. Tyndallization
c. Pasteurization
d. Ignition
*e. Dry heat
1988. Many organic compounds break up in the cell into simple products. What compounds break up into ammonia, carbon dioxide, and water in the human body?
*a. Amino acids
b. Monosaccharides
c. Monohydric alcohols
d. Keto acids
e. Fatty acids
1989. Many organic compounds break up in the cell into simple products. What compounds break up into ammonia, carbon dioxide, and water in the human body?
a. Monosaccharides
*b. Amino acids
c. Keto acids
d. Monohydric alcohols
e. Fatty acids
1990. Many organic compounds break up in the cell into simple products. What compounds break up into ammonia, carbon dioxide, and water in the human body?
a. Monosaccharides
b. Monohydric alcohols
*c. Amino acids
d. Fatty acids
e. Keto acids
1991. Many species of wild rose are a source of vitamins, fatty oils, and herbal material. Specify the juicy pseudocarps that are harvested as herbal raw material:
a. Aggregate-accessory fruits
b. Coenobia
c. Cenocarp stone-fruits
d. Hesperides
*e. Rose hips
1992. Many species of wild rose are a source of vitamins, fatty oils, and herbal material. Specify the juicy pseudocarps that are harvested as herbal raw material:
a. Cenocarp stone-fruits
*b. Rose hips
c. Hesperides
d. Aggregate-accessory fruits
e. Coenobia
1993. Many species of wild rose are a source of vitamins, fatty oils, and herbal material. Specify the juicy pseudocarps that are harvested as herbal raw material:
a. Coenobia
*b. Rose hips
c. Cenocarp stone-fruits
d. Aggregate-accessory fruits
e. Hesperides
1994. Mass fraction of pharmaceutical preparations that contain aromatic amino groups is defined through nitrite titration. What external indicator is used in this case?
*a. Starch-iodide paper
b. Eosin
c. Eriochrome Black T
d. Methylene red
e. Phenolphthalein
1995. Mass fraction of pharmaceutical preparations that contain aromatic amino groups is defined through nitrite titration. What external indicator is used in this case?
a. Eosin
b. Phenolphthalein
c. Methylene red
*d. Starch-iodide paper
e. Eriochrome Black T
1996. Mass fraction of pharmaceutical preparations that contain aromatic amino groups is defined through nitrite titration. What external indicator is used in this case?
a. Eriochrome Black T
b. Phenolphthalein
c. Methylene red
d. Eosin
*e. Starch-iodide paper
1997. Medical school graduates have received active immunization against hepatitis B, because doctors are at greater risk of contracting this disease. Name the main transmission route of this pathogen:
a. Airborne droplet transmission
b. Contact transmission
c. Waterborne transmission
d. Alimentary transmission
*e. Parenteral transmission
1998. Medical school graduates have received active immunization against hepatitis B, because doctors are at greater risk of contracting this disease. Name the main transmission route of this pathogen:
a. Alimentary transmission
b. Contact transmission
c. Waterborne transmission
*d. Parenteral transmission
e. Airborne droplet transmission
1999. Medical school graduates have received active immunization against hepatitis B, because doctors are at greater risk of contracting this disease. Name the main transmission route of this pathogen:
a. Waterborne transmission
b. Airborne droplet transmission
c. Alimentary transmission
d. Contact transmission
*e. Parenteral transmission
2000. Medicinal plants infected by microorganisms cannot be used in pharmaceutical industry. Invasive properties of phytopathogenic micro-organisms are due to the following enzymes:
a. Isomerase
b. Lyase
*c. Hydrolytic
d. Oxidoreductase
e. Transferase
2001. Medicinal plants infected by microorganisms cannot be used in pharmaceutical industry. Invasive properties of phytopathogenic micro-organisms are due to the following enzymes:
a. Oxidoreductase
b. Isomerase
c. Lyase
*d. Hydrolytic
e. Transferase
2002. Medicinal plants infected by microorganisms cannot be used in pharmaceutical industry. Invasive properties of phytopathogenic micro-organisms are due to the following enzymes:
a. Transferase
b. Oxidoreductase
*c. Hydrolytic
d. Isomerase
e. Lyase
2003. Megaloblasts and a high color index were detected in the child's blood. The child was diagnosed with megaloblastic anemia. What drug must be prescribed in this case?
*a. Cyanocobalamin
b. Ascorbic acid
c. Iron lactate
d. Coamidum
e. Nicotinic acid
2004. Megaloblasts and a high color index were detected in the child's blood. The child was diagnosed with megaloblastic anemia. What drug must be prescribed in this case?
a. Ascorbic acid
b. Iron lactate
c. Nicotinic acid
d. Coamidum
*e. Cyanocobalamin
2005. Megaloblasts and a high color index were detected in the child's blood. The child was diagnosed with megaloblastic anemia. What drug must be prescribed in this case?
a. Coamidum
b. Nicotinic acid
c. Iron lactate
d. Ascorbic acid
*e. Cyanocobalamin
2006. Megaloblasts and a high color index were detected in the patient's blood. The diagnosis of megaloblastic anemia was established. What drug should be prescribed in this case?
a. Rutin
b. Ascorbic acid
c. Tocopherol acetate
d. Pyridoxine
*e. Cyanocobalamin
2007. Megaloblasts and a high color index were detected in the patient's blood. The diagnosis of megaloblastic anemia was established. What drug should be prescribed in this case?
a. Tocopherol acetate
b. Ascorbic acid
*c. Cyanocobalamin
d. Rutin
e. Pyridoxine
2008. Megaloblasts and a high color index were detected in the patient's blood. The diagnosis of megaloblastic anemia was established. What drug should be prescribed in this case?
a. Tocopherol acetate
b. Rutin
c. Pyridoxine
*d. Cyanocobalamin
e. Ascorbic acid
2009. Mercurometry is used for quantification of halide ions in their interaction with solutions of mercury salts (Hg_2^2+). What indicator allows analytical visualization of complete precipitation of halide ions?
a. Eosin
b. Methyl orange
c. Fluorescein
d. Potassium dichromate
*e. Diphenylcarbazone
2010. Mercurometry is used for quantification of halide ions in their interaction with solutions of mercury salts (Hg_2^2+). What indicator allows analytical visualization of complete precipitation of halide ions?
a. Methyl orange
b. Fluorescein
c. Eosin
*d. Diphenylcarbazone
e. Potassium dichromate
2011. Mercurometry is used for quantification of halide ions in their interaction with solutions of mercury salts (Hg_2^2+). What indicator allows analytical visualization of complete precipitation of halide ions?
a. Potassium dichromate
*b. Diphenylcarbazone
c. Methyl orange
d. Eosin
e. Fluorescein
2012. Metal ions in the blood are transported in a complex with proteins. What blood protein contains copper?
*a. Ceruloplasmin
b. Fibrinolysin
c. Fibrinogen
d. Thrombin
e. Albumin
2013. Metal ions in the blood are transported in a complex with proteins. What blood protein contains copper?
a. Thrombin
b. Fibrinolysin
c. Albumin
*d. Ceruloplasmin
e. Fibrinogen
2014. Metal ions in the blood are transported in a complex with proteins. What blood protein contains copper?
a. Thrombin
b. Fibrinolysin
c. Fibrinogen
*d. Ceruloplasmin
e. Albumin
2015. Metallochromic indicators are used in complexometric titration, when determining total water hardness. For this purpose, the following can be used as an indicator:
a. Fluorescein
b. Potassium chromate
c. Phenolphthalein
d. Methyl red
*e. Eriochrome black Т
2016. Metallochromic indicators are used in complexometric titration, when determining total water hardness. For this purpose, the following can be used as an indicator:
a. Potassium chromate
*b. Eriochrome black Т
c. Methyl red
d. Fluorescein
e. Phenolphthalein
2017. Metallochromic indicators are used in complexometric titration, when determining total water hardness. For this purpose, the following can be used as an indicator:
a. Potassium chromate
b. Phenolphthalein
c. Methyl red
*d. Eriochrome black Т
e. Fluorescein
2018. Microbial survival within environment is facilitated by spore formation. What microorganisms of those listed below are spore formers:
a. Bacteroides
b. Peptococci
c. Staphylococci
*d. Clostridia
e. Peptostreptococci
2019. Microbial survival within environment is facilitated by spore formation. What microorganisms of those listed below are spore formers:
a. Peptococci
*b. Clostridia
c. Peptostreptococci
d. Staphylococci
e. Bacteroides
2020. Microbial survival within environment is facilitated by spore formation. What microorganisms of those listed below are spore formers:
a. Staphylococci
b. Bacteroides
c. Peptococci
d. Peptostreptococci
*e. Clostridia
2021. Microbiological purity of tableted drugs had been tested at factory. Samples cultivation in mannitol salt agar resulted in growth of golden-yellow colonies, microscopic examination of colonies detected gram-positive globular bacteria positioned in clusters; microorganisms had plasma coagulation prorerties. What pure bacterial culture was obtained?
a. Enterobacteriaceae
b. Staphylococcus saprophyticus
c. Pseudomonas aeruginosa
*d. Staphylococcus aureus
e. Staphylococcus epidermidis
2022. Microbiological purity of tableted drugs had been tested at factory. Samples cultivation in mannitol salt agar resulted in growth of golden-yellow colonies, microscopic examination of colonies detected gram-positive globular bacteria positioned in clusters; microorganisms had plasma coagulation prorerties. What pure bacterial culture was obtained?
a. Pseudomonas aeruginosa
b. Staphylococcus epidermidis
*c. Staphylococcus aureus
d. Enterobacteriaceae
e. Staphylococcus saprophyticus
2023. Microbiological purity of tableted drugs had been tested at factory. Samples cultivation in mannitol salt agar resulted in growth of golden-yellow colonies, microscopic examination of colonies detected gram-positive globular bacteria positioned in clusters; microorganisms had plasma coagulation prorerties. What pure bacterial culture was obtained?
a. Staphylococcus saprophyticus
b. Enterobacteriaceae
*c. Staphylococcus aureus
d. Staphylococcus epidermidis
e. Pseudomonas aeruginosa
2024. Microbiological studies of air in the pharmacy room revealed the presence of pathogenic staphylococci. Select the medium in which you can detect the lecithinase activity of the isolated microorganism:
a. Bismuth sulfite agar
b. Meat-extract agar
c. Sugar agar
d. Blood agar
*e. Yolk-salt agar
2025. Microbiological studies of air in the pharmacy room revealed the presence of pathogenic staphylococci. Select the medium in which you can detect the lecithinase activity of the isolated microorganism:
a. Meat-extract agar
b. Sugar agar
c. Bismuth sulfite agar
d. Blood agar
*e. Yolk-salt agar
2026. Microbiological studies of air in the pharmacy room revealed the presence of pathogenic staphylococci. Select the medium in which you can detect the lecithinase activity of the isolated microorganism:
a. Sugar agar
b. Meat-extract agar
c. Blood agar
d. Bismuth sulfite agar
*e. Yolk-salt agar
2027. Microcrystalloscopy reaction for detecting potassium ions is the following one:
*a. With sodium lead (II) hexanitrocuprate
b. Flame colour test
c. With sodium hydrotartrate
d. With sodium hexanitrocobaltate
e. With sodium tetraphenylborate
2028. Microcrystalloscopy reaction for detecting potassium ions is the following one:
a. With sodium tetraphenylborate
*b. With sodium lead (II) hexanitrocuprate
c. With sodium hydrotartrate
d. Flame colour test
e. With sodium hexanitrocobaltate
2029. Microcrystalloscopy reaction for detecting potassium ions is the following one:
a. With sodium tetraphenylborate
b. With sodium hexanitrocobaltate
*c. With sodium lead (II) hexanitrocuprate
d. Flame colour test
e. With sodium hydrotartrate
2030. Microorganisms in the environment are being affected by various physical factors. What is the effect of high temperature on a microbial cell?
a. Albuminolysis
b. Fats saponification
c. Transition into anabiosis state
*d. Irreversible degradation of all cellular structures
e. Mutagenic effect
2031. Microorganisms in the environment are being affected by various physical factors. What is the effect of high temperature on a microbial cell?
a. Fats saponification
*b. Irreversible degradation of all cellular structures
c. Mutagenic effect
d. Albuminolysis
e. Transition into anabiosis state
2032. Microorganisms in the environment are being affected by various physical factors. What is the effect of high temperature on a microbial cell?
a. Mutagenic effect
*b. Irreversible degradation of all cellular structures
c. Transition into anabiosis state
d. Albuminolysis
e. Fats saponification
2033. Microscopy of a leaf of a heliophyte plant detects several dense layers of elongated chlorophyll-containing cells that are located under the epidermis. These cells are oriented perpendicular to the surface of the leaf. What type of parenchyma is it?
*a. Palisade parenchyma
b. Storage parenchyma
c. Folded parenchyma
d. Spongy parenchyma
e. Water-storage parenchyma
2034. Microscopy of a leaf of a heliophyte plant detects several dense layers of elongated chlorophyll-containing cells that are located under the epidermis. These cells are oriented perpendicular to the surface of the leaf. What type of parenchyma is it?
a. Spongy parenchyma
*b. Palisade parenchyma
c. Water-storage parenchyma
d. Folded parenchyma
e. Storage parenchyma
2035. Microscopy of a leaf of a heliophyte plant detects several dense layers of elongated chlorophyll-containing cells that are located under the epidermis. These cells are oriented perpendicular to the surface of the leaf. What type of parenchyma is it?
a. Water-storage parenchyma
b. Folded parenchyma
*c. Palisade parenchyma
d. Storage parenchyma
e. Spongy parenchyma
2036. Microscopy of a plant stem revealed a complex tissue, consisting of sieve-like tubes with satellite cells, bast fibers, and bast parenchyma. Name this tissue:
a. Periderm
*b. Phloem
c. Rhytidoma
d. Epidermis
e. Xylem
2037. Microscopy of a plant stem revealed a complex tissue, consisting of sieve-like tubes with satellite cells, bast fibers, and bast parenchyma. Name this tissue:
a. Rhytidoma
b. Periderm
*c. Phloem
d. Epidermis
e. Xylem
2038. Microscopy of a plant stem revealed a complex tissue, consisting of sieve-like tubes with satellite cells, bast fibers, and bast parenchyma. Name this tissue:
a. Xylem
b. Rhytidoma
*c. Phloem
d. Epidermis
e. Periderm
2039. Microscopy of a rhizome revealed periphloematic vascular bundles. What plant does it belong to?
a. Acorus calamus
b. Elymus repens
c. Potentilla erecta
*d. Dryopteris filix-mas
e. Convallaria majalis
2040. Microscopy of a rhizome revealed periphloematic vascular bundles. What plant does it belong to?
a. Elymus repens
*b. Dryopteris filix-mas
c. Convallaria majalis
d. Acorus calamus
e. Potentilla erecta
2041. Microscopy of a rhizome revealed periphloematic vascular bundles. What plant does it belong to?
a. Potentilla erecta
*b. Dryopteris filix-mas
c. Elymus repens
d. Convallaria majalis
e. Acorus calamus
2042. Microscopy of a root detects root hairs, which are the cell growths of:
a. Endodermis
b. Epidermis
c. Exodermis
*d. Epiblem
e. Mesoderm
2043. Microscopy of a root detects root hairs, which are the cell growths of:
a. Endodermis
b. Epidermis
c. Mesoderm
*d. Epiblem
e. Exodermis
2044. Microscopy of a root detects root hairs, which are the cell growths of:
a. Epidermis
b. Exodermis
c. Mesoderm
*d. Epiblem
e. Endodermis
2045. Microscopy of a smear obtained from the pharyngeal mucosa of a sick child with suspected diphtheria detected yellow-brown bacilli with dark blue thickened ends. What staining method was used in this case?
*a. Neisser stain
b. Aujeszky stain
c. Loeffler stain
d. Ziehl-Neelsen stain
e. Gram stain
2046. Microscopy of a smear obtained from the pharyngeal mucosa of a sick child with suspected diphtheria detected yellow-brown bacilli with dark blue thickened ends. What staining method was used in this case?
*a. Neisser stain
b. Ziehl-Neelsen stain
c. Aujeszky stain
d. Gram stain
e. Loeffler stain
2047. Microscopy of a smear obtained from the pharyngeal mucosa of a sick child with suspected diphtheria detected yellow-brown bacilli with dark blue thickened ends. What staining method was used in this case?
a. Aujeszky stain
b. Loeffler stain
c. Gram stain
d. Ziehl-Neelsen stain
*e. Neisser stain
2048. Microscopy of a vaginal discharge detects round and oval Gram-positive cells that gemmate and form a pseudomycelium. What medicines must be recommended for treatment, if the diagnosis of candidiasis is confirmed?
*a. Clotrimazole, nystatin
b. Tetracycline, oleandomycin
c. Penicillin, streptomycin
d. Sulgin (sulfaguanidine), phthalazol  (phthalylsulfathiazole)
e. Erythromycin, monomycin
2049. Microscopy of a vaginal discharge detects round and oval Gram-positive cells that gemmate and form a pseudomycelium. What medicines must be recommended for treatment, if the diagnosis of candidiasis is confirmed?
a. Erythromycin, monomycin
b. Tetracycline, oleandomycin
c. Sulgin (sulfaguanidine), phthalazol  (phthalylsulfathiazole)
*d. Clotrimazole, nystatin
e. Penicillin, streptomycin
2050. Microscopy of a vaginal discharge detects round and oval Gram-positive cells that gemmate and form a pseudomycelium. What medicines must be recommended for treatment, if the diagnosis of candidiasis is confirmed?
a. Sulgin (sulfaguanidine), phthalazol  (phthalylsulfathiazole)
b. Tetracycline, oleandomycin
*c. Clotrimazole, nystatin
d. Erythromycin, monomycin
e. Penicillin, streptomycin
2051. Microscopy of an axial organ shows that between the secondary phloem and xylem there is a layer of live, thin-walled, tightly packed, slightly elongated cells. What structure is formed by these cells?
a. Phellogen
b. Pericycle
*c. Cambium
d. Procambium
e. Periderm
2052. Microscopy of an axial organ shows that between the secondary phloem and xylem there is a layer of live, thin-walled, tightly packed, slightly elongated cells. What structure is formed by these cells?
a. Procambium
*b. Cambium
c. Periderm
d. Phellogen
e. Pericycle
2053. Microscopy of an axial organ shows that between the secondary phloem and xylem there is a layer of live, thin-walled, tightly packed, slightly elongated cells. What structure is formed by these cells?
a. Procambium
b. Phellogen
*c. Cambium
d. Pericycle
e. Periderm
2054. Microscopy of plants detects parenchymal cells with thin membranes, a large nucleus, and a large number of ribosomes. What tissue is it?
a. Parenchyma
*b. Meristematic tissue
c. Dermal tissue
d. Secretory tissue
e. Mechanical tissue
2055. Microscopy of plants detects parenchymal cells with thin membranes, a large nucleus, and a large number of ribosomes. What tissue is it?
a. Parenchyma
*b. Meristematic tissue
c. Mechanical tissue
d. Dermal tissue
e. Secretory tissue
2056. Microscopy of plants detects parenchymal cells with thin membranes, a large nucleus, and a large number of ribosomes. What tissue is it?
a. Parenchyma
*b. Meristematic tissue
c. Mechanical tissue
d. Secretory tissue
e. Dermal tissue
2057. Microscopy of subterranean organs of an Аsteraceae family plant shows articulated laticifers with anastomoses filled with white latex. It is characterisic of the following plant:
a. Achillea millefolium
b. Artemisia absinthium
*c. Taraxacum officinale
d. Helianthus annuus
e. Bidens tripartitа
2058. Microscopy of subterranean organs of an Аsteraceae family plant shows articulated laticifers with anastomoses filled with white latex. It is characterisic of the following plant:
a. Bidens tripartitа
b. Helianthus annuus
*c. Taraxacum officinale
d. Achillea millefolium
e. Artemisia absinthium
2059. Microscopy of subterranean organs of an Аsteraceae family plant shows articulated laticifers with anastomoses filled with white latex. It is characterisic of the following plant:
a. Helianthus annuus
b. Artemisia absinthium
c. Bidens tripartitа
d. Achillea millefolium
*e. Taraxacum officinale
2060. Microscopy of the patient's vaginal smear detected trichomonads. What antimicrobial drug must be prescribed for treatment in this case?
a. Clotrimazole
b. Fluconazole
c. Biseptol (Co-trimoxazole)
d. Ethambutol
*e. Metronidazole
2061. Microscopy of the patient's vaginal smear detected trichomonads. What antimicrobial drug must be prescribed for treatment in this case?
a. Fluconazole
b. Biseptol (Co-trimoxazole)
*c. Metronidazole
d. Clotrimazole
e. Ethambutol
2062. Microscopy of the patient's vaginal smear detected trichomonads. What antimicrobial drug must be prescribed for treatment in this case?
a. Fluconazole
b. Biseptol (Co-trimoxazole)
c. Clotrimazole
d. Ethambutol
*e. Metronidazole
2063. Moisture content of thermally unstable preparations can be determined by:
*a. Karl Fischer titration
b. Iodometry
c. Permanganatometry
d. Nitritometry
e. Bromatometry
2064. Moisture content of thermally unstable preparations can be determined by:
a. Bromatometry
b. Nitritometry
c. Permanganatometry
d. Iodometry
*e. Karl Fischer titration
2065. Moisture content of thermally unstable preparations can be determined by:
a. Nitritometry
*b. Karl Fischer titration
c. Bromatometry
d. Permanganatometry
e. Iodometry
2066. Molar attenuation coefficient is the optical density of a solution with absorbent layer 1 cm thick and concentration that equals:
*a. 1 mol/L
b. 1 g/mL
c. 1%
d. 0.1 mol/L
e. 1 g/L
2067. Molar attenuation coefficient is the optical density of a solution with absorbent layer 1 cm thick and concentration that equals:
a. 1 g/mL
b. 0.1 mol/L
c. 1 g/L
d. 1%
*e. 1 mol/L
2068. Molar attenuation coefficient is the optical density of a solution with absorbent layer 1 cm thick and concentration that equals:
a. 1 g/mL
b. 1 g/L
c. 1%
*d. 1 mol/L
e. 0.1 mol/L
2069. Molecular absorption analysis is based on the Beer–Lambert–Bouguer law. According to this law, optical density of a solution is:
*a. Directly proportional to the layer thickness and concentration of the substance
b. Directly proportional to the concentration and inversely proportional to the layer thickness
c. Directly proportional to the layer thickness and monochromatic light absorption index
d. Inversely proportional to the layer thickness and concentration of the substance
e. Directly proportional to the concentration and inversely proportional to the monochromatic light absorption index
2070. Molecular absorption analysis is based on the Beer–Lambert–Bouguer law. According to this law, optical density of a solution is:
a. Directly proportional to the concentration and inversely proportional to the layer thickness
b. Directly proportional to the concentration and inversely proportional to the monochromatic light absorption index
*c. Directly proportional to the layer thickness and concentration of the substance
d. Directly proportional to the layer thickness and monochromatic light absorption index
e. Inversely proportional to the layer thickness and concentration of the substance
2071. Molecular absorption analysis is based on the Beer–Lambert–Bouguer law. According to this law, optical density of a solution is:
a. Directly proportional to the layer thickness and monochromatic light absorption index
b. Directly proportional to the concentration and inversely proportional to the layer thickness
c. Directly proportional to the concentration and inversely proportional to the monochromatic light absorption index
d. Inversely proportional to the layer thickness and concentration of the substance
*e. Directly proportional to the layer thickness and concentration of the substance
2072. Morphological analysis of poplar inflorescence showed that it is a simple monopodial inflorescence: main axis is drooping, the flowers are sessile, unisexual. Specify the type of inflorescence:
*a. Catkin
b. Panicle
c. Capitulum
d. Head
e. Cyme
2073. Morphological analysis of poplar inflorescence showed that it is a simple monopodial inflorescence: main axis is drooping, the flowers are sessile, unisexual. Specify the type of inflorescence:
a. Cyme
b. Head
c. Panicle
*d. Catkin
e. Capitulum
2074. Morphological analysis of poplar inflorescence showed that it is a simple monopodial inflorescence: main axis is drooping, the flowers are sessile, unisexual. Specify the type of inflorescence:
a. Head
b. Cyme
c. Capitulum
d. Panicle
*e. Catkin
2075. Morphologically the herbaceous plant being studied can be identified as Convallaria majalis. To confirm this conclusion additionally, a leaf of this plant was examined under the microscope and a search for the following crystalline inclusions was conducted:
*a. Raphides
b. Crystal sand
c. Druse crystals
d. Single crystals
e. Styloid crystals
2076. Morphologically the herbaceous plant being studied can be identified as Convallaria majalis. To confirm this conclusion additionally, a leaf of this plant was examined under the microscope and a search for the following crystalline inclusions was conducted:
a. Druse crystals
*b. Raphides
c. Single crystals
d. Crystal sand
e. Styloid crystals
2077. Morphologically the herbaceous plant being studied can be identified as Convallaria majalis. To confirm this conclusion additionally, a leaf of this plant was examined under the microscope and a search for the following crystalline inclusions was conducted:
a. Styloid crystals
*b. Raphides
c. Crystal sand
d. Druse crystals
e. Single crystals
2078. Most antidepressants are nonselective monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs) --- they inhibit flavin-containing enzymes that catalyze oxidative deamination of monoamines in the mitochondria of brain neurons. Name the coenzyme of MAO:
a. Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
*b. Flavin adenine dinucleotide
c. Pyridoxal phosphate
d. Thiamine pyrophosphate
e. Coenzyme A
2079. Most antidepressants are nonselective monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs) --- they inhibit flavin-containing enzymes that catalyze oxidative deamination of monoamines in the mitochondria of brain neurons. Name the coenzyme of MAO:
a. Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
b. Coenzyme A
c. Thiamine pyrophosphate
*d. Flavin adenine dinucleotide
e. Pyridoxal phosphate
2080. Most antidepressants are nonselective monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs) --- they inhibit flavin-containing enzymes that catalyze oxidative deamination of monoamines in the mitochondria of brain neurons. Name the coenzyme of MAO:
a. Pyridoxal phosphate
b. Coenzyme A
c. Thiamine pyrophosphate
d. Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
*e. Flavin adenine dinucleotide
2081. Most often, the quantitative content of primary and secondary aromatic amines in drugs is determined using the following method:
a. Cerimetry
b. Titanometry
c. Ascorbinometry
d. Permanganatometry
*e. Nitritometry
2082. Most often, the quantitative content of primary and secondary aromatic amines in drugs is determined using the following method:
a. Permanganatometry
*b. Nitritometry
c. Titanometry
d. Cerimetry
e. Ascorbinometry
2083. Most often, the quantitative content of primary and secondary aromatic amines in drugs is determined using the following method:
a. Titanometry
b. Permanganatometry
c. Ascorbinometry
d. Cerimetry
*e. Nitritometry
2084. Mother of a 10-year-old child came to the pharmacy to obtain a drug for prevention of upper respiratory tract infections. What drug would be recommended by the dispensing chemist?
*a. Interferon
b. Benzoteph
c. Tetracycline
d. Doxorubicin
e. Carvedilol
2085. Mother of a 10-year-old child came to the pharmacy to obtain a drug for prevention of upper respiratory tract infections. What drug would be recommended by the dispensing chemist?
a. Benzoteph
*b. Interferon
c. Doxorubicin
d. Carvedilol
e. Tetracycline
2086. Mother of a 10-year-old child came to the pharmacy to obtain a drug for prevention of upper respiratory tract infections. What drug would be recommended by the dispensing chemist?
a. Doxorubicin
*b. Interferon
c. Carvedilol
d. Benzoteph
e. Tetracycline
2087. Mycorrhiza on the oak roots is a symbiosis of:
a. Bacterium and higher plant
*b. Fungus and higher plant
c. Fungus and alga
d. Fungus and bacterium
e. Two different bacteria
2088. Mycorrhiza on the oak roots is a symbiosis of:
a. Bacterium and higher plant
*b. Fungus and higher plant
c. Fungus and alga
d. Two different bacteria
e. Fungus and bacterium
2089. Mycorrhiza on the oak roots is a symbiosis of:
a. Two different bacteria
*b. Fungus and higher plant
c. Fungus and bacterium
d. Bacterium and higher plant
e. Fungus and alga
2090. Name the ability of a drug to accumulate within the patient's body:
*a. Cumulation
b. Allergy
c. Antagonism
d. Habituation
e. Synergism
2091. Name the ability of a drug to accumulate within the patient's body:
*a. Cumulation
b. Antagonism
c. Synergism
d. Allergy
e. Habituation
2092. Name the ability of a drug to accumulate within the patient's body:
a. Antagonism
b. Synergism
*c. Cumulation
d. Allergy
e. Habituation
2093. Name the difference in potentials that occurs due to uneven distribution of electrolytes between the outer and inner surfaces of the cell membrane:
*a. Membrane potential
b. Contact biopotential
c. Surface biopotential
d. Chemical biopotential
e. Diffuse biopotential
2094. Name the difference in potentials that occurs due to uneven distribution of electrolytes between the outer and inner surfaces of the cell membrane:
a. Chemical biopotential
*b. Membrane potential
c. Contact biopotential
d. Diffuse biopotential
e. Surface biopotential
2095. Name the difference in potentials that occurs due to uneven distribution of electrolytes between the outer and inner surfaces of the cell membrane:
a. Surface biopotential
b. Diffuse biopotential
c. Contact biopotential
d. Chemical biopotential
*e. Membrane potential
2096. Name the initial compound for the synthesis of phthalic acid:
a. 1,2-Dichlorobenzene
*b. o-Xylene
c. Salicylic acid
d. m-Xylene
e. 2-Chlorobenzoic acid
2097. Name the initial compound for the synthesis of phthalic acid:
a. 1,2-Dichlorobenzene
*b. o-Xylene
c. m-Xylene
d. Salicylic acid
e. 2-Chlorobenzoic acid
2098. Name the initial compound for the synthesis of phthalic acid:
a. m-Xylene
*b. o-Xylene
c. 2-Chlorobenzoic acid
d. Salicylic acid
e. 1,2-Dichlorobenzene
2099. Name the method of binding foreign ions in an analysis:
*a. Analytical masking
b. Analytical separation
c. Analytical extraction
d. Analytical concentration
e. Analytical coprecipitation
2100. Name the method of binding foreign ions in an analysis:
a. Analytical coprecipitation
b. Analytical separation
c. Analytical concentration
d. Analytical extraction
*e. Analytical masking
2101. Name the method of binding foreign ions in an analysis:
a. Analytical separation
b. Analytical concentration
c. Analytical extraction
d. Analytical coprecipitation
*e. Analytical masking
2102. Name the method of sorption detoxification of the body, in which the adsorption of toxic substances occurs when the sorbent passes through the digestive system?
*a. Enterosorption
b. Liquorosorption
c. Hemosorption
d. Lymphosorption
e. Contact therapy
2103. Name the method of sorption detoxification of the body, in which the adsorption of toxic substances occurs when the sorbent passes through the digestive system?
a. Liquorosorption
*b. Enterosorption
c. Hemosorption
d. Lymphosorption
e. Contact therapy
2104. Name the method of sorption detoxification of the body, in which the adsorption of toxic substances occurs when the sorbent passes through the digestive system?
a. Lymphosorption
b. Hemosorption
c. Liquorosorption
*d. Enterosorption
e. Contact therapy
2105. Name the pharmacopoeial method for determining the relative molecular mass of high-molecular compounds:
a. Calorimetry
b. Cryoscopy
c. Ebullioscopy
*d. Viscosimetry
e. Osmometry
2106. Name the pharmacopoeial method for determining the relative molecular mass of high-molecular compounds:
a. Cryoscopy
*b. Viscosimetry
c. Ebullioscopy
d. Calorimetry
e. Osmometry
2107. Name the pharmacopoeial method for determining the relative molecular mass of high-molecular compounds:
a. Osmometry
b. Ebullioscopy
c. Cryoscopy
d. Calorimetry
*e. Viscosimetry
2108. Name the phenomenon when one drug weakens the effect of another drug:
a. Tachyphylaxis
b. Sensitization
*c. Antagonism
d. Tolerance
e. Potentiation
2109. Name the phenomenon when one drug weakens the effect of another drug:
a. Tachyphylaxis
b. Tolerance
c. Potentiation
*d. Antagonism
e. Sensitization
2110. Name the phenomenon when one drug weakens the effect of another drug:
a. Tolerance
b. Sensitization
*c. Antagonism
d. Tachyphylaxis
e. Potentiation
2111. Name the plants that have adapted to growing in an arid environment and developed a number of mechanisms to reduce the moisture loss.
a. Hygrophytes
b. Hydrophytes
c. Mesophytes
*d. Xerophytes
e. Succulents
2112. Name the plants that have adapted to growing in an arid environment and developed a number of mechanisms to reduce the moisture loss.
a. Mesophytes
b. Hygrophytes
c. Hydrophytes
*d. Xerophytes
e. Succulents
2113. Name the plants that have adapted to growing in an arid environment and developed a number of mechanisms to reduce the moisture loss.
a. Succulents
b. Hydrophytes
*c. Xerophytes
d. Hygrophytes
e. Mesophytes
2114. Name the primary drug of choice for treatment of narcotic analgesics overdose.
*a. Naloxone
b. Caffeine and sodium benzoate
c. Calcium chloride
d. Unithiol (Dimercaprol)
e. Diazepam
2115. Name the primary drug of choice for treatment of narcotic analgesics overdose.
a. Calcium chloride
b. Diazepam
*c. Naloxone
d. Unithiol (Dimercaprol)
e. Caffeine and sodium benzoate
2116. Name the primary drug of choice for treatment of narcotic analgesics overdose.
a. Diazepam
b. Calcium chloride
c. Unithiol (Dimercaprol)
d. Caffeine and sodium benzoate
*e. Naloxone
2117. Name the process of cell membrane saturation with a fat-like substance - suberin:
a. Cutinization
b. Lignification
*c. Suberization
d. Mucification
e. Mineralization
2118. Name the process of cell membrane saturation with a fat-like substance - suberin:
a. Lignification
*b. Suberization
c. Cutinization
d. Mineralization
e. Mucification
2119. Name the process of cell membrane saturation with a fat-like substance - suberin:
a. Lignification
*b. Suberization
c. Mucification
d. Mineralization
e. Cutinization
2120. Name the process of liquid droplets or gas (air) bubbles fusion that occurs when they collide inside a moving medium (liquid, gas), or on the surface of a body:
a. Aggregation
b. Sedimentation
c. Electrophoresis
*d. Coalescence
e. Coagulation
2121. Name the process of liquid droplets or gas (air) bubbles fusion that occurs when they collide inside a moving medium (liquid, gas), or on the surface of a body:
a. Electrophoresis
b. Coagulation
c. Aggregation
d. Sedimentation
*e. Coalescence
2122. Name the process of liquid droplets or gas (air) bubbles fusion that occurs when they collide inside a moving medium (liquid, gas), or on the surface of a body:
a. Sedimentation
b. Electrophoresis
*c. Coalescence
d. Aggregation
e. Coagulation
2123. Name the process of spontaneous adhesion of drops in an emulsion to each other:
*a. Coalescence
b. Flotation
c. Coagulation
d. Sedimentation
e. Flocculation
2124. Name the process of spontaneous adhesion of drops in an emulsion to each other:
a. Flocculation
b. Sedimentation
*c. Coalescence
d. Coagulation
e. Flotation
2125. Name the process of spontaneous adhesion of drops in an emulsion to each other:
a. Flotation
b. Sedimentation
c. Flocculation
*d. Coalescence
e. Coagulation
2126. Name the process when a dissolved macromolecular compound is sedimented by adding electrolytes into the solution:
a. Denaturation
*b. Salting out
c. Flocculation
d. Coacervation
e. Jelly formation
2127. Name the process when a dissolved macromolecular compound is sedimented by adding electrolytes into the solution:
a. Jelly formation
*b. Salting out
c. Denaturation
d. Coacervation
e. Flocculation
2128. Name the process when a dissolved macromolecular compound is sedimented by adding electrolytes into the solution:
a. Jelly formation
b. Coacervation
*c. Salting out
d. Flocculation
e. Denaturation
2129. Name the process, when the precipitate obtained as a result of coagulation transforms into a stable colloidal solution.
a. Flocculation
b. Colloidal protection
c. Micelle formation
*d. Peptization
e. Heterocoagulation
2130. Name the process, when the precipitate obtained as a result of coagulation transforms into a stable colloidal solution.
a. Heterocoagulation
b. Flocculation
c. Micelle formation
d. Colloidal protection
*e. Peptization
2131. Name the process, when the precipitate obtained as a result of coagulation transforms into a stable colloidal solution.
a. Micelle formation
b. Colloidal protection
c. Flocculation
d. Heterocoagulation
*e. Peptization
2132. Name the psychostimulant with analeptical action, which is a purine derivative:
*a. Caffeine and sodium benzoate
b. Tramadol
c. Sulpiride
d. Medazepam
e. Sodium bromide
2133. Name the psychostimulant with analeptical action, which is a purine derivative:
a. Sodium bromide
b. Medazepam
c. Tramadol
d. Sulpiride
*e. Caffeine and sodium benzoate
2134. Name the psychostimulant with analeptical action, which is a purine derivative:
a. Sulpiride
b. Sodium bromide
c. Medazepam
d. Tramadol
*e. Caffeine and sodium benzoate
2135. Name the reactions and reagents that under certain conditions allow determination of certain ions in the presence of other ions:
*a. Specific
b. Group
c. Characteristic
d. Selective
e. General
2136. Name the reactions and reagents that under certain conditions allow determination of certain ions in the presence of other ions:
a. Group
*b. Specific
c. Selective
d. General
e. Characteristic
2137. Name the reactions and reagents that under certain conditions allow determination of certain ions in the presence of other ions:
a. Selective
b. General
*c. Specific
d. Group
e. Characteristic
2138. Name the serums made from blood donated by volunteers or reconvalescent donors:
*a. Homologous
b. Corpuscular
c. Heterologous
d. Attenuated
e. Autoimmune
2139. Name the serums made from blood donated by volunteers or reconvalescent donors:
a. Corpuscular
b. Attenuated
*c. Homologous
d. Heterologous
e. Autoimmune
2140. Name the serums made from blood donated by volunteers or reconvalescent donors:
a. Heterologous
b. Corpuscular
c. Autoimmune
*d. Homologous
e. Attenuated
2141. Name the state of colloidal particles that has zero electrokinetic potential and can be characterized by the absence of directed movement of the granules in the electric field.
a. Compensated
b. Neutral
c. Neutralized
d. Electroneutral
*e. Isoelectric
2142. Name the state of colloidal particles that has zero electrokinetic potential and can be characterized by the absence of directed movement of the granules in the electric field.
a. Neutralized
b. Electroneutral
c. Compensated
d. Neutral
*e. Isoelectric
2143. Name the state of colloidal particles that has zero electrokinetic potential and can be characterized by the absence of directed movement of the granules in the electric field.
a. Neutralized
b. Neutral
*c. Isoelectric
d. Compensated
e. Electroneutral
2144. Name the structural unit of a colloidal solution of a medicinal substance:
a. Molecule
*b. Micelle
c. Ion
d. Zwitterion
e. Atom
2145. Name the structural unit of a colloidal solution of a medicinal substance:
a. Molecule
*b. Micelle
c. Zwitterion
d. Atom
e. Ion
2146. Name the structural unit of a colloidal solution of a medicinal substance:
a. Molecule
b. Atom
*c. Micelle
d. Ion
e. Zwitterion
2147. Name the substance that is the initial compound in the polymerization reaction:
*a. Monomer
b. Nucleophile
c. Dimer
d. Polymer
e. Polypeptide
2148. Name the substance that is the initial compound in the polymerization reaction:
*a. Monomer
b. Polypeptide
c. Dimer
d. Polymer
e. Nucleophile
2149. Name the substance that is the initial compound in the polymerization reaction:
a. Nucleophile
*b. Monomer
c. Dimer
d. Polymer
e. Polypeptide
2150. Name the titrimetric method for quantitative determination of phenol and its derivatives:
*a. Bromatometry
b. Permanganatometry
c. Cerimetry
d. Ascorbinometry
e. Nitritometry
2151. Name the titrimetric method for quantitative determination of phenol and its derivatives:
a. Permanganatometry
*b. Bromatometry
c. Nitritometry
d. Cerimetry
e. Ascorbinometry
2152. Name the titrimetric method for quantitative determination of phenol and its derivatives:
a. Permanganatometry
b. Nitritometry
*c. Bromatometry
d. Cerimetry
e. Ascorbinometry
2153. Name the type of an inflorescence that has an elongated and thickened main axis with sessile flowers:
*a. Spadix
b. Spike
c. Round capitulum
d. Umbel
e. Flat capitulum
2154. Name the type of an inflorescence that has an elongated and thickened main axis with sessile flowers:
*a. Spadix
b. Spike
c. Umbel
d. Flat capitulum
e. Round capitulum
2155. Name the type of an inflorescence that has an elongated and thickened main axis with sessile flowers:
a. Spike
b. Flat capitulum
*c. Spadix
d. Umbel
e. Round capitulum
2156. Narcotic analgesics can induce constipations in a patient. What receptors are affected in such cases?
*a. Opiate receptors
b. Mechanoreceptors
c. Dopamine receptors
d. Glutamate receptors
e. Chemoreceptors
2157. Narcotic analgesics can induce constipations in a patient. What receptors are affected in such cases?
a. Chemoreceptors
b. Glutamate receptors
c. Dopamine receptors
*d. Opiate receptors
e. Mechanoreceptors
2158. Narcotic analgesics can induce constipations in a patient. What receptors are affected in such cases?
a. Glutamate receptors
b. Dopamine receptors
c. Chemoreceptors
*d. Opiate receptors
e. Mechanoreceptors
2159. Natural peptides can carry out various functions. What bioactive peptide is a major antioxidant and functions as a coenzyme?
*a. Glutathione
b. Oxytocin
c. Bradykinin
d. Liberin
e. Anserine
2160. Natural peptides can carry out various functions. What bioactive peptide is a major antioxidant and functions as a coenzyme?
a. Bradykinin
*b. Glutathione
c. Anserine
d. Liberin
e. Oxytocin
2161. Natural peptides can carry out various functions. What bioactive peptide is a major antioxidant and functions as a coenzyme?
a. Bradykinin
*b. Glutathione
c. Oxytocin
d. Anserine
e. Liberin
2162. Neutralization of drugs, particularly sulfonamides, in the liver occurs by means of acetylation. Name the compound that causes acetylation reaction:
a. Glycine
b. Succinyl-CoA
c. Glutathione
*d. Acetyl-CoA
e. S-adenosylmethionine
2163. Neutralization of drugs, particularly sulfonamides, in the liver occurs by means of acetylation. Name the compound that causes acetylation reaction:
a. Succinyl-CoA
*b. Acetyl-CoA
c. Glutathione
d. S-adenosylmethionine
e. Glycine
2164. Neutralization of drugs, particularly sulfonamides, in the liver occurs by means of acetylation. Name the compound that causes acetylation reaction:
a. Succinyl-CoA
b. Glutathione
c. Glycine
*d. Acetyl-CoA
e. S-adenosylmethionine
2165. Neutralization of xenobiotics and active endogenous metabolites often occurs via inclusion of an oxygen atom into a substrate molecule as the result of the following process:
*a. Hydroxylation
b. Deaminization
c. Phosphorilation
d. Decarboxylation
e. Transamination
2166. Neutralization of xenobiotics and active endogenous metabolites often occurs via inclusion of an oxygen atom into a substrate molecule as the result of the following process:
a. Deaminization
b. Decarboxylation
c. Transamination
*d. Hydroxylation
e. Phosphorilation
2167. Neutralization of xenobiotics and active endogenous metabolites often occurs via inclusion of an oxygen atom into a substrate molecule as the result of the following process:
a. Deaminization
b. Transamination
*c. Hydroxylation
d. Phosphorilation
e. Decarboxylation
2168. Nitrate anions, unlike nitrite anions, do not interact with:
a. Antipyrine
b. Sulfanilic acid
*c. Potassium permanganate
d. Diphenylamine
e. Iron(II) sulfate and sulfuric acid
2169. Nitrate anions, unlike nitrite anions, do not interact with:
a. Iron(II) sulfate and sulfuric acid
b. Diphenylamine
*c. Potassium permanganate
d. Antipyrine
e. Sulfanilic acid
2170. Nitrate anions, unlike nitrite anions, do not interact with:
a. Sulfanilic acid
*b. Potassium permanganate
c. Antipyrine
d. Diphenylamine
e. Iron(II) sulfate and sulfuric acid
2171. Nitrite ions can be detected in the presence of nitrate ions using the following:
a. Crystalline iron (III) sulfate
*b. Crystalline antipyrine in the presence of diluted HCl
c. Crystalline sodium thiosulfate
d. Dimethylglyoxime
e. Diphenylcarbazone
2172. Nitrite ions can be detected in the presence of nitrate ions using the following:
a. Crystalline iron (III) sulfate
b. Crystalline sodium thiosulfate
c. Dimethylglyoxime
d. Diphenylcarbazone
*e. Crystalline antipyrine in the presence of diluted HCl
2173. Nitrite ions can be detected in the presence of nitrate ions using the following:
a. Crystalline iron (III) sulfate
b. Diphenylcarbazone
c. Dimethylglyoxime
*d. Crystalline antipyrine in the presence of diluted HCl
e. Crystalline sodium thiosulfate
2174. Nitritometry is used to determine primary aromatic amines. What indicator is used in the process?
a. Eosin
*b. Tropaeolin 00
c. Potassium chromate
d. Methyl orange
e. Phenolphthalein
2175. Nitritometry is used to determine primary aromatic amines. What indicator is used in the process?
a. Phenolphthalein
*b. Tropaeolin 00
c. Methyl orange
d. Eosin
e. Potassium chromate
2176. Nitritometry is used to determine primary aromatic amines. What indicator is used in the process?
a. Phenolphthalein
*b. Tropaeolin 00
c. Potassium chromate
d. Eosin
e. Methyl orange
2177. Non-aqueous acid-base titration is used for the substances that have low solubility in water and weak basic or weak acidic properties. Choose the titrant and medium for titration of substances with weak basic properties.
a. HCl solution in anhydrous acetic acid
b. HClO solution in anhydrous acetic acid
c. HCl solution in dioxane
*d. HClO_4 solution in anhydrous acetic acid
e. HCl solution in methanol
2178. Non-aqueous acid-base titration is used for the substances that have low solubility in water and weak basic or weak acidic properties. Choose the titrant and medium for titration of substances with weak basic properties.
a. HCl solution in dioxane
b. HCl solution in methanol
c. HClO solution in anhydrous acetic acid
*d. HClO_4 solution in anhydrous acetic acid
e. HCl solution in anhydrous acetic acid
2179. Non-aqueous acid-base titration is used for the substances that have low solubility in water and weak basic or weak acidic properties. Choose the titrant and medium for titration of substances with weak basic properties.
a. HClO solution in anhydrous acetic acid
b. HCl solution in anhydrous acetic acid
*c. HClO_4 solution in anhydrous acetic acid
d. HCl solution in dioxane
e. HCl solution in methanol
2180. Nuciform fruits include a certain type of one-seeded fruit that does not burst when ripe. Its base is enclosed in a cup-shaped cupule formed by the broad part of the peduncle to which the flower was attached. Name this type of fruit:
*a. Acorn
b. Samara
c. Nut
d. Nutlet
e. Caryopsis
2181. Nuciform fruits include a certain type of one-seeded fruit that does not burst when ripe. Its base is enclosed in a cup-shaped cupule formed by the broad part of the peduncle to which the flower was attached. Name this type of fruit:
a. Nutlet
b. Samara
*c. Acorn
d. Nut
e. Caryopsis
2182. Nuciform fruits include a certain type of one-seeded fruit that does not burst when ripe. Its base is enclosed in a cup-shaped cupule formed by the broad part of the peduncle to which the flower was attached. Name this type of fruit:
a. Nutlet
b. Samara
c. Caryopsis
d. Nut
*e. Acorn
2183. Number of freedom degrees at the point of intersection of liquidus with Y-axis on the fusibility chart of a two-component system would equal:
a. 2
b. 1
c. 3
d. 4
*e. 0
2184. Number of freedom degrees at the point of intersection of liquidus with Y-axis on the fusibility chart of a two-component system would equal:
a. 4
b. 2
c. 1
*d. 0
e. 3
2185. Number of freedom degrees at the point of intersection of liquidus with Y-axis on the fusibility chart of a two-component system would equal:
a. 4
b. 3
*c. 0
d. 2
e. 1
2186. On a fusiblity curve of a two-component system with simple eutectic we can observe the following above the liquidus line:
*a. Both components are in liquid state
b. Both components are in gaseous state
c. Both components are in solid state
d. Each component is partially in different aggregate states
e. One component is liquid, another is solid
2187. On a fusiblity curve of a two-component system with simple eutectic we can observe the following above the liquidus line:
a. One component is liquid, another is solid
b. Each component is partially in different aggregate states
c. Both components are in gaseous state
d. Both components are in solid state
*e. Both components are in liquid state
2188. On a fusiblity curve of a two-component system with simple eutectic we can observe the following above the liquidus line:
a. One component is liquid, another is solid
b. Each component is partially in different aggregate states
c. Both components are in solid state
d. Both components are in gaseous state
*e. Both components are in liquid state
2189. On day 7 of dimedrol (diphenhydramine) treatment, the patient noted a decrease in the effectiveness of the drug. What pharmacological concept describes the decreased response of the body to a drug?
a. Carcinogenicity
b. Embryotoxicity
*c. Tolerance
d. Mutagenicity
e. Idiosyncrasy
2190. On day 7 of dimedrol (diphenhydramine) treatment, the patient noted a decrease in the effectiveness of the drug. What pharmacological concept describes the decreased response of the body to a drug?
a. Embryotoxicity
b. Idiosyncrasy
c. Mutagenicity
*d. Tolerance
e. Carcinogenicity
2191. On day 7 of dimedrol (diphenhydramine) treatment, the patient noted a decrease in the effectiveness of the drug. What pharmacological concept describes the decreased response of the body to a drug?
a. Idiosyncrasy
b. Carcinogenicity
c. Mutagenicity
d. Embryotoxicity
*e. Tolerance
2192. On examination the doctor suspects Cushing syndrome in the patient. This preliminary diagnosis can be confirmed by elevated levels of the following substance in the patient's blood:
*a. Cortisol
b. Cholesterol
c. Tocopherol
d. Retinol
e. Adrenaline
2193. On examination the doctor suspects Cushing syndrome in the patient. This preliminary diagnosis can be confirmed by elevated levels of the following substance in the patient's blood:
*a. Cortisol
b. Tocopherol
c. Cholesterol
d. Retinol
e. Adrenaline
2194. On examination the doctor suspects Cushing syndrome in the patient. This preliminary diagnosis can be confirmed by elevated levels of the following substance in the patient's blood:
a. Cholesterol
b. Retinol
*c. Cortisol
d. Tocopherol
e. Adrenaline
2195. On examination the patient's sclera and oral mucosa are icteric. What biochemical blood value can be expected to be increased?
a. Albumin
b. Cholesterol
c. Glucose
d. Amylase
*e. Bilirubin
2196. On examination the patient's sclera and oral mucosa are icteric. What biochemical blood value can be expected to be increased?
a. Amylase
b. Albumin
c. Cholesterol
d. Glucose
*e. Bilirubin
2197. On examination the patient's sclera and oral mucosa are icteric. What biochemical blood value can be expected to be increased?
a. Glucose
b. Amylase
*c. Bilirubin
d. Albumin
e. Cholesterol
2198. On the 2nd day after developing acute inflammation of the knee joint, the patient exhibits the joint enlargement, swelling of the skin. At what stage of inflammation are these signs typically observed?
a. Alteration
b. Proliferation
c. Regeneration
d. Sclerosis
*e. Exudation
2199. On the 2nd day after developing acute inflammation of the knee joint, the patient exhibits the joint enlargement, swelling of the skin. At what stage of inflammation are these signs typically observed?
a. Alteration
b. Regeneration
c. Sclerosis
*d. Exudation
e. Proliferation
2200. On the 2nd day after developing acute inflammation of the knee joint, the patient exhibits the joint enlargement, swelling of the skin. At what stage of inflammation are these signs typically observed?
a. Proliferation
b. Alteration
c. Sclerosis
d. Regeneration
*e. Exudation
2201. On the surface of a crystalline substance predominantly those ions are adsorbed that compose the crystalline lattice or are isomorphous to its ions, forming in the process a hard-to-dissolve compound with crystalline ions. Name the author (authors) of this rule:
a. Duclaux, Traube
b. Van 't Hoff
*c. Paneth, Fajans
d. Schulze, Hardy
e. Rehbinder
2202. On the surface of a crystalline substance predominantly those ions are adsorbed that compose the crystalline lattice or are isomorphous to its ions, forming in the process a hard-to-dissolve compound with crystalline ions. Name the author (authors) of this rule:
a. Schulze, Hardy
b. Van 't Hoff
*c. Paneth, Fajans
d. Rehbinder
e. Duclaux, Traube
2203. On the surface of a crystalline substance predominantly those ions are adsorbed that compose the crystalline lattice or are isomorphous to its ions, forming in the process a hard-to-dissolve compound with crystalline ions. Name the author (authors) of this rule:
a. Van 't Hoff
b. Duclaux, Traube
*c. Paneth, Fajans
d. Schulze, Hardy
e. Rehbinder
2204. On the teeth of a leaf blade, water droplets are excreted through a constantly open gap between two guard cells of the epidermis. This structure is a:
*a. Hydathode
b. Glandular hair
c. Osmophor
d. Sticky hair
e. Nectary
2205. On the teeth of a leaf blade, water droplets are excreted through a constantly open gap between two guard cells of the epidermis. This structure is a:
a. Glandular hair
b. Nectary
c. Sticky hair
d. Osmophor
*e. Hydathode
2206. On the teeth of a leaf blade, water droplets are excreted through a constantly open gap between two guard cells of the epidermis. This structure is a:
a. Sticky hair
b. Osmophor
c. Glandular hair
d. Nectary
*e. Hydathode
2207. One of the biological functions performed by glycoproteins in the body is a regulatory (hormone) function. What hormone is a glycoprotein based on its chemical nature?
*a. Thyrotropin
b. Insulin
c. Glucagon
d. Cortisol
e. Aldosterone
2208. One of the biological functions performed by glycoproteins in the body is a regulatory (hormone) function. What hormone is a glycoprotein based on its chemical nature?
a. Glucagon
b. Cortisol
c. Insulin
d. Aldosterone
*e. Thyrotropin
2209. One of the biological functions performed by glycoproteins in the body is a regulatory (hormone) function. What hormone is a glycoprotein based on its chemical nature?
a. Insulin
b. Aldosterone
c. Glucagon
*d. Thyrotropin
e. Cortisol
2210. One of the cations of the 1st group hinders detection of the others. Therefore, it should be detected first and then extracted. Name this cation:
a. Na^+
*b. NH^4+
c. Ca^2+
d. Li^+
e. K^+
2211. One of the cations of the 1st group hinders detection of the others. Therefore, it should be detected first and then extracted. Name this cation:
a. Na^+
*b. NH^4+
c. Li^+
d. K^+
e. Ca^2+
2212. One of the cations of the 1st group hinders detection of the others. Therefore, it should be detected first and then extracted. Name this cation:
a. Na^+
b. Li^+
c. K^+
*d. NH^4+
e. Ca^2+
2213. One of the important diagnostic features of garden sage and motherwort is their shape of corolla. Their flowers have the following type of corolla:
*a. Bilabiate
b. Pseudoligulate
c. Ligulate
d. Thimble-shaped
e. Funnelform
2214. One of the important diagnostic features of garden sage and motherwort is their shape of corolla. Their flowers have the following type of corolla:
a. Ligulate
b. Pseudoligulate
c. Thimble-shaped
*d. Bilabiate
e. Funnelform
2215. One of the important diagnostic features of garden sage and motherwort is their shape of corolla. Their flowers have the following type of corolla:
a. Pseudoligulate
b. Thimble-shaped
c. Funnelform
d. Ligulate
*e. Bilabiate
2216. One week after an inpatient treatment with penicillin, a microorganism that was initially susceptible to this antibiotic developed a resistance to penicillin, tetracyclines, aminoglycosides, and macrolides. What mechanism of antibiotic resistance formation is observed in this case?
a. Mutational
*b. R-plasmid
c. Natural selection
d. Spontaneous
e. Phenotypic
2217. One week after an inpatient treatment with penicillin, a microorganism that was initially susceptible to this antibiotic developed a resistance to penicillin, tetracyclines, aminoglycosides, and macrolides. What mechanism of antibiotic resistance formation is observed in this case?
a. Mutational
b. Phenotypic
c. Spontaneous
d. Natural selection
*e. R-plasmid
2218. One week after an inpatient treatment with penicillin, a microorganism that was initially susceptible to this antibiotic developed a resistance to penicillin, tetracyclines, aminoglycosides, and macrolides. What mechanism of antibiotic resistance formation is observed in this case?
a. Phenotypic
b. Natural selection
c. Mutational
d. Spontaneous
*e. R-plasmid
2219. Optical activity of monosaccharides can be explained by their:
*a. Asymmetric carbon atoms in a molecule
b. Aldehyde or ketone group
c. Complicated rotation around sigma-bond
d. Asymmetric crystal
e. Number of hydroxyl groups in a molecule
2220. Optical activity of monosaccharides can be explained by their:
a. Aldehyde or ketone group
b. Number of hydroxyl groups in a molecule
*c. Asymmetric carbon atoms in a molecule
d. Asymmetric crystal
e. Complicated rotation around sigma-bond
2221. Optical activity of monosaccharides can be explained by their:
a. Number of hydroxyl groups in a molecule
b. Complicated rotation around sigma-bond
c. Asymmetric crystal
d. Aldehyde or ketone group
*e. Asymmetric carbon atoms in a molecule
2222. Osmotic pressure is an important characteristic of biological fluids. Semipermeable membranes are necessary for penetration of solvent molecules. What substance textbfCANNOT be used as a semipermeable membrane?
*a. Glass
b. Parchment
c. Biological membrane
d. Gelatine
e. Collodion film
2223. Osmotic pressure is an important characteristic of biological fluids. Semipermeable membranes are necessary for penetration of solvent molecules. What substance textbfCANNOT be used as a semipermeable membrane?
a. Collodion film
b. Parchment
c. Gelatine
*d. Glass
e. Biological membrane
2224. Osmotic pressure is an important characteristic of biological fluids. Semipermeable membranes are necessary for penetration of solvent molecules. What substance textbfCANNOT be used as a semipermeable membrane?
a. Parchment
b. Biological membrane
c. Collodion film
*d. Glass
e. Gelatine
2225. Oxidation of carbohydrates, amino acids, and fatty acids generally occurs via tricarboxylic acid cycle. Specify the acid with which acetyl-CoA reacts first in the tricarboxylic acid cycle:
*a. Oxaloacetic
b. Malic
c. Fumaric
d. Citric
e. Isocitric
2226. Oxidation of carbohydrates, amino acids, and fatty acids generally occurs via tricarboxylic acid cycle. Specify the acid with which acetyl-CoA reacts first in the tricarboxylic acid cycle:
a. Citric
b. Isocitric
*c. Oxaloacetic
d. Fumaric
e. Malic
2227. Oxidation of carbohydrates, amino acids, and fatty acids generally occurs via tricarboxylic acid cycle. Specify the acid with which acetyl-CoA reacts first in the tricarboxylic acid cycle:
a. Citric
b. Isocitric
*c. Oxaloacetic
d. Malic
e. Fumaric
2228. Oxygen cocktails are used in treatment of upper air passages. What kind of colloid system is it?
a. Emulsion
*b. Aerosol
c. Powder
d. Paste
e. Suspension
2229. Oxygen cocktails are used in treatment of upper air passages. What kind of colloid system is it?
a. Powder
b. Suspension
c. Emulsion
d. Paste
*e. Aerosol
2230. Oxygen cocktails are used in treatment of upper air passages. What kind of colloid system is it?
a. Suspension
b. Paste
c. Powder
d. Emulsion
*e. Aerosol
2231. Oxytocin was prescribed for a pregnant woman with weak labor activity, who was hospitalized into the maternity ward. What pharmacological group does this drug belong to?
*a. Pituitary hormone preparations
b. Glucocorticoids
c. Mineralocorticoids
d. Thyroid hormone preparations
e. Anabolic steroids
2232. Oxytocin was prescribed for a pregnant woman with weak labor activity, who was hospitalized into the maternity ward. What pharmacological group does this drug belong to?
*a. Pituitary hormone preparations
b. Mineralocorticoids
c. Glucocorticoids
d. Anabolic steroids
e. Thyroid hormone preparations
2233. Oxytocin was prescribed for a pregnant woman with weak labor activity, who was hospitalized into the maternity ward. What pharmacological group does this drug belong to?
a. Anabolic steroids
b. Glucocorticoids
c. Thyroid hormone preparations
*d. Pituitary hormone preparations
e. Mineralocorticoids
2234. Paracetamol has antipyretic and analgesic effect. In the human body it is neutralized in the following organ:
*a. Liver
b. Intestine
c. Lungs
d. Spleen
e. Heart
2235. Paracetamol has antipyretic and analgesic effect. In the human body it is neutralized in the following organ:
a. Intestine
b. Heart
c. Spleen
d. Lungs
*e. Liver
2236. Paracetamol has antipyretic and analgesic effect. In the human body it is neutralized in the following organ:
a. Spleen
b. Lungs
*c. Liver
d. Heart
e. Intestine
2237. Pastes are used in medicine to treat skin diseases. What type of disperse systems are they?
*a. Suspensions
b. Aerosols
c. Foams
d. Emulsions
e. Powders
2238. Pastes are used in medicine to treat skin diseases. What type of disperse systems are they?
*a. Suspensions
b. Foams
c. Aerosols
d. Powders
e. Emulsions
2239. Pastes are used in medicine to treat skin diseases. What type of disperse systems are they?
a. Powders
b. Foams
c. Aerosols
d. Emulsions
*e. Suspensions
2240. Pathogenic microorganisms are characterized by presence of aggression enzymes that determine their virulence. Select the aggression enzyme:
a. Carbohydrase
b. Lyase
c. Transferase
*d. Hyaluronidase
e. Oxidase
2241. Pathogenic microorganisms are characterized by presence of aggression enzymes that determine their virulence. Select the aggression enzyme:
a. Oxidase
*b. Hyaluronidase
c. Carbohydrase
d. Lyase
e. Transferase
2242. Pathogenic microorganisms are characterized by presence of aggression enzymes that determine their virulence. Select the aggression enzyme:
a. Oxidase
b. Lyase
*c. Hyaluronidase
d. Carbohydrase
e. Transferase
2243. Pathogenic microorganisms produce various enzymes in order to penetrate body tissues and spread there. Point out these enzymes among those named below:
a. Lyase, ligase
*b. Hyaluronidase, lecithinase
c. Transferase, nuclease
d. Esterase, protease
e. Oxydase, catalase
2244. Pathogenic microorganisms produce various enzymes in order to penetrate body tissues and spread there. Point out these enzymes among those named below:
a. Lyase, ligase
b. Oxydase, catalase
*c. Hyaluronidase, lecithinase
d. Esterase, protease
e. Transferase, nuclease
2245. Pathogenic microorganisms produce various enzymes in order to penetrate body tissues and spread there. Point out these enzymes among those named below:
a. Oxydase, catalase
b. Lyase, ligase
*c. Hyaluronidase, lecithinase
d. Esterase, protease
e. Transferase, nuclease
2246. Permanganatometry is used in determination of many organic and inorganic compounds. What are the main advantages of permanganatometry over the other oxidimetric methods?
a. High selectivity and sensitivity when determining compounds
b. Pure potassium permanganate is easily available and obtainable
c. Various types of indicators can be used; in some cases catalysts are necessary to accelerate the reaction
d. Sufficiently high stability of potassium permanganate and its solutions
*e. Sufficiently high redox potential; it is possible to determine titration end-point without indicator
2247. Permanganatometry is used in determination of many organic and inorganic compounds. What are the main advantages of permanganatometry over the other oxidimetric methods?
a. Sufficiently high stability of potassium permanganate and its solutions
*b. Sufficiently high redox potential; it is possible to determine titration end-point without indicator
c. Pure potassium permanganate is easily available and obtainable
d. Various types of indicators can be used; in some cases catalysts are necessary to accelerate the reaction
e. High selectivity and sensitivity when determining compounds
2248. Permanganatometry is used in determination of many organic and inorganic compounds. What are the main advantages of permanganatometry over the other oxidimetric methods?
a. Sufficiently high stability of potassium permanganate and its solutions
b. High selectivity and sensitivity when determining compounds
*c. Sufficiently high redox potential; it is possible to determine titration end-point without indicator
d. Various types of indicators can be used; in some cases catalysts are necessary to accelerate the reaction
e. Pure potassium permanganate is easily available and obtainable
2249. Pharmacological action of enterosgel (methylsilicic acid hydrogel, polymethylsiloxane polyhydrate) is based on a certain phenomenon characteristic of disperse systems. Name this phenomenon:
a. Adhesion
b. Cohesion
c. Desorption
d. Wettability
*e. Adsorption
2250. Pharmacological action of enterosgel (methylsilicic acid hydrogel, polymethylsiloxane polyhydrate) is based on a certain phenomenon characteristic of disperse systems. Name this phenomenon:
a. Cohesion
*b. Adsorption
c. Desorption
d. Wettability
e. Adhesion
2251. Pharmacological action of enterosgel (methylsilicic acid hydrogel, polymethylsiloxane polyhydrate) is based on a certain phenomenon characteristic of disperse systems. Name this phenomenon:
a. Cohesion
b. Adhesion
*c. Adsorption
d. Wettability
e. Desorption
2252. Pharmacopoeia reaction of potassium ferrocyanide with zinc cations produces:
*a. White precipitate
b. Black precipitate
c. Red precipitate
d. Yellow precipitate
e. Violet precipitate
2253. Pharmacopoeia reaction of potassium ferrocyanide with zinc cations produces:
a. Red precipitate
*b. White precipitate
c. Violet precipitate
d. Black precipitate
e. Yellow precipitate
2254. Pharmacopoeia reaction of potassium ferrocyanide with zinc cations produces:
a. Violet precipitate
b. Yellow precipitate
c. Black precipitate
*d. White precipitate
e. Red precipitate
2255. Pharmacy sells glaucine hydrochloride to a patient with chronic bronchitis. What common side effect should he be warned about?
a. Allergic skin rashes
*b. Decrease of arterial pressure
c. Increase of intraocular pressure
d. Disruption of cardiac rate
e. Excitation of central nervous system
2256. Pharmacy sells glaucine hydrochloride to a patient with chronic bronchitis. What common side effect should he be warned about?
a. Disruption of cardiac rate
b. Allergic skin rashes
c. Excitation of central nervous system
d. Increase of intraocular pressure
*e. Decrease of arterial pressure
2257. Pharmacy sells glaucine hydrochloride to a patient with chronic bronchitis. What common side effect should he be warned about?
a. Disruption of cardiac rate
b. Increase of intraocular pressure
c. Excitation of central nervous system
d. Allergic skin rashes
*e. Decrease of arterial pressure
2258. Phenobarbital causes induction of smooth endoplasmic reticulum enzymes in the cells. As a result, the amount of active pharmaceutical ingredient decreases due to the following process:
*a. Activation of microsomal oxidation
b. Activation of lipid peroxidation
c. Activation of uric acid synthesis
d. Activation of glycolysis
e. Activation of protein peroxidation
2259. Phenobarbital causes induction of smooth endoplasmic reticulum enzymes in the cells. As a result, the amount of active pharmaceutical ingredient decreases due to the following process:
a. Activation of lipid peroxidation
b. Activation of glycolysis
c. Activation of uric acid synthesis
d. Activation of protein peroxidation
*e. Activation of microsomal oxidation
2260. Phenobarbital causes induction of smooth endoplasmic reticulum enzymes in the cells. As a result, the amount of active pharmaceutical ingredient decreases due to the following process:
a. Activation of protein peroxidation
*b. Activation of microsomal oxidation
c. Activation of lipid peroxidation
d. Activation of uric acid synthesis
e. Activation of glycolysis
2261. Phosphate anions and arsenate anions form similar precipitates insoluble in an ammonia solution during their reaction with:
*a. Magnesia mixture (a solution containing MgCl_2, NH_4Cl, NH_3)
b. Cobalt sulfate solution
c. Sodium hydroxide solution
d. Nessler's reagent
e. Lead acetate solution
2262. Phosphate anions and arsenate anions form similar precipitates insoluble in an ammonia solution during their reaction with:
a. Cobalt sulfate solution
*b. Magnesia mixture (a solution containing MgCl_2, NH_4Cl, NH_3)
c. Lead acetate solution
d. Nessler's reagent
e. Sodium hydroxide solution
2263. Phosphate anions and arsenate anions form similar precipitates insoluble in an ammonia solution during their reaction with:
a. Cobalt sulfate solution
b. Nessler's reagent
*c. Magnesia mixture (a solution containing MgCl_2, NH_4Cl, NH_3)
d. Sodium hydroxide solution
e. Lead acetate solution
2264. Phosphorylation reactions in the cell are catalyzed by enzymes that have the trivial name of "kinases". What class of enzymes do they belong to?
a. Isomerases
b. Oxidoreductases
c. Ligases
d. Lyases
*e. Transferases
2265. Phosphorylation reactions in the cell are catalyzed by enzymes that have the trivial name of "kinases". What class of enzymes do they belong to?
a. Ligases
*b. Transferases
c. Oxidoreductases
d. Isomerases
e. Lyases
2266. Phosphorylation reactions in the cell are catalyzed by enzymes that have the trivial name of "kinases". What class of enzymes do they belong to?
a. Lyases
*b. Transferases
c. Isomerases
d. Ligases
e. Oxidoreductases
2267. Photometry is one of the most common instrumental methods of analysis. It is based on the measurement of:
a. Rotation angle
b. Fluorescence intensity
*c. Optical density
d. Wavelength
e. Refractive index
2268. Photometry is one of the most common instrumental methods of analysis. It is based on the measurement of:
a. Wavelength
*b. Optical density
c. Fluorescence intensity
d. Rotation angle
e. Refractive index
2269. Photometry is one of the most common instrumental methods of analysis. It is based on the measurement of:
a. Wavelength
b. Rotation angle
*c. Optical density
d. Refractive index
e. Fluorescence intensity
2270. Phytopathogenic microorganisms can significantly affect the yield of medicinal plants by decreasing their biomass or content of active substances. A plant afflicted with phytopathogenic microorganisms can develop rot in the organs and tissues rich in water, which leads to discoloration and changes in taste and odor. What microorganisms are the most common cause of rot?
a. Mycoplasma and rickettsia
b. Mycoplasma and viroids
c. Viruses and rickettsia
*d. Fungi and bacteria
e. Viruses and bacteria
2271. Phytopathogenic microorganisms can significantly affect the yield of medicinal plants by decreasing their biomass or content of active substances. A plant afflicted with phytopathogenic microorganisms can develop rot in the organs and tissues rich in water, which leads to discoloration and changes in taste and odor. What microorganisms are the most common cause of rot?
a. Viruses and bacteria
*b. Fungi and bacteria
c. Viruses and rickettsia
d. Mycoplasma and viroids
e. Mycoplasma and rickettsia
2272. Phytopathogenic microorganisms can significantly affect the yield of medicinal plants by decreasing their biomass or content of active substances. A plant afflicted with phytopathogenic microorganisms can develop rot in the organs and tissues rich in water, which leads to discoloration and changes in taste and odor. What microorganisms are the most common cause of rot?
a. Viruses and bacteria
b. Mycoplasma and viroids
c. Mycoplasma and rickettsia
d. Viruses and rickettsia
*e. Fungi and bacteria
2273. Plant fatty acids have an odd number of carbon atoms. What product forms as a result of beta-oxidation of fatty acids with an odd number of carbon atoms?
a. Palmitoyl-CoA
*b. Propionyl-CoA
c. Acetoacetyl-CoA
d. Stearoyl-CoA
e. Oxymethylglutaryl-CoA
2274. Plant fatty acids have an odd number of carbon atoms. What product forms as a result of beta-oxidation of fatty acids with an odd number of carbon atoms?
a. Palmitoyl-CoA
b. Oxymethylglutaryl-CoA
*c. Propionyl-CoA
d. Stearoyl-CoA
e. Acetoacetyl-CoA
2275. Plant fatty acids have an odd number of carbon atoms. What product forms as a result of beta-oxidation of fatty acids with an odd number of carbon atoms?
a. Stearoyl-CoA
b. Palmitoyl-CoA
*c. Propionyl-CoA
d. Acetoacetyl-CoA
e. Oxymethylglutaryl-CoA
2276. Plantago major inflorescence grows at the apex, its rachis is long, with sessile flowers. Name this type of inflorescence:
a. Panicle
b. Capitulum
*c. Spike
d. Thyrse
e. Spadix
2277. Plantago major inflorescence grows at the apex, its rachis is long, with sessile flowers. Name this type of inflorescence:
a. Spadix
b. Panicle
*c. Spike
d. Capitulum
e. Thyrse
2278. Plantago major inflorescence grows at the apex, its rachis is long, with sessile flowers. Name this type of inflorescence:
a. Thyrse
b. Capitulum
c. Spadix
d. Panicle
*e. Spike
2279. Plants that grow in moderately humid conditions belong to the following ecological group:
a. Hydrophytes
b. Succulents
*c. Mesophytes
d. Hygrophytes
e. Xerophytes
2280. Plants that grow in moderately humid conditions belong to the following ecological group:
a. Hygrophytes
b. Xerophytes
c. Succulents
*d. Mesophytes
e. Hydrophytes
2281. Pleural tap performed by a doctor has yielded a significant amount of yellow exudate. Microscopy detected neutrophils in the exudate. What type of exudate is it characteristic of?
a. Bloody
b. Fibrinous
*c. Purulent
d. Hemorrhagic
e. Serous
2282. Pleural tap performed by a doctor has yielded a significant amount of yellow exudate. Microscopy detected neutrophils in the exudate. What type of exudate is it characteristic of?
a. Bloody
b. Hemorrhagic
*c. Purulent
d. Fibrinous
e. Serous
2283. Pleural tap performed by a doctor has yielded a significant amount of yellow exudate. Microscopy detected neutrophils in the exudate. What type of exudate is it characteristic of?
a. Fibrinous
*b. Purulent
c. Hemorrhagic
d. Serous
e. Bloody
2284. Polarography is one of the electrochemical methods of analysis. What parameter is used in polarographic analysis to identify the substance being analyzed?
a. Height of a polarographic wave
b. Position of a polarographic wave
c. Magnitude of the electromotive force
d. Width of a polarographic wave
*e. Half-wave potential
2285. Polarography is one of the electrochemical methods of analysis. What parameter is used in polarographic analysis to identify the substance being analyzed?
a. Position of a polarographic wave
b. Width of a polarographic wave
c. Height of a polarographic wave
d. Magnitude of the electromotive force
*e. Half-wave potential
2286. Polarography is one of the electrochemical methods of analysis. What parameter is used in polarographic analysis to identify the substance being analyzed?
a. Width of a polarographic wave
b. Height of a polarographic wave
*c. Half-wave potential
d. Position of a polarographic wave
e. Magnitude of the electromotive force
2287. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is widely used in modern laboratory diagnostics. What can be detected using this reaction?
a. Allergy to the pathogen
b. Antigen of the microorganism
c. Antibodies to the microorganism
*d. Nucleic acid of the microorganism
e. Autoimmune disease
2288. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is widely used in modern laboratory diagnostics. What can be detected using this reaction?
a. Antigen of the microorganism
*b. Nucleic acid of the microorganism
c. Antibodies to the microorganism
d. Autoimmune disease
e. Allergy to the pathogen
2289. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is widely used in modern laboratory diagnostics. What can be detected using this reaction?
a. Autoimmune disease
*b. Nucleic acid of the microorganism
c. Allergy to the pathogen
d. Antibodies to the microorganism
e. Antigen of the microorganism
2290. Potassium dichromate solution is to be analyzed. What physicochemical method of analysis will be used to determine its concentration?
*a. Spectrophotometry
b. Coulometry
c. Fluorimetry
d. Conductometric titration
e. Polarimetry
2291. Potassium dichromate solution is to be analyzed. What physicochemical method of analysis will be used to determine its concentration?
*a. Spectrophotometry
b. Coulometry
c. Polarimetry
d. Conductometric titration
e. Fluorimetry
2292. Potassium dichromate solution is to be analyzed. What physicochemical method of analysis will be used to determine its concentration?
a. Conductometric titration
b. Fluorimetry
c. Coulometry
d. Polarimetry
*e. Spectrophotometry
2293. Potassium iodide solution has been added to the solution containing cations of the sixth analytical group (acid-base classification). It resulted in the red precipitate soluble in excess of reagent. What cations are present in the solution?
a. Cadmium
*b. Mercury (II)
c. Bismuth
d. Nickel
e. Cobalt (II)
2294. Potassium iodide solution has been added to the solution containing cations of the sixth analytical group (acid-base classification). It resulted in the red precipitate soluble in excess of reagent. What cations are present in the solution?
a. Cadmium
*b. Mercury (II)
c. Cobalt (II)
d. Bismuth
e. Nickel
2295. Potassium iodide solution has been added to the solution containing cations of the sixth analytical group (acid-base classification). It resulted in the red precipitate soluble in excess of reagent. What cations are present in the solution?
a. Cobalt (II)
*b. Mercury (II)
c. Nickel
d. Cadmium
e. Bismuth
2296. Potentiometric methods of analysis are based on the use of:
a. Dependence of the electric current on the concentration of the analyte
b. Dependence of the mass of the precipitate on the concentration of the analyte
c. Dependence of the volume of the produced gas on the concentration of the analyte
d. Dependence of the volume of the titrant on the concentration of the analyte
*e. Dependence of the electromotive force (EMF) of a galvanic cell on the concentration of the analyte
2297. Potentiometric methods of analysis are based on the use of:
a. Dependence of the electric current on the concentration of the analyte
b. Dependence of the volume of the titrant on the concentration of the analyte
c. Dependence of the mass of the precipitate on the concentration of the analyte
d. Dependence of the volume of the produced gas on the concentration of the analyte
*e. Dependence of the electromotive force (EMF) of a galvanic cell on the concentration of the analyte
2298. Potentiometric methods of analysis are based on the use of:
a. Dependence of the mass of the precipitate on the concentration of the analyte
b. Dependence of the electric current on the concentration of the analyte
c. Dependence of the volume of the produced gas on the concentration of the analyte
*d. Dependence of the electromotive force (EMF) of a galvanic cell on the concentration of the analyte
e. Dependence of the volume of the titrant on the concentration of the analyte
2299. Potentiometry is an analytical method widely used in pharmaceutical analysis. In what galvanic cell its electromotive force (EMF) does not depend on the value of standard electrode potentials?
*a. Concentration galvanic cell
b. Galvanic cell with ionic transport
c. Reversible galvanic cell
d. Chemical galvanic cell
e. Galvanic cell without ionic transport
2300. Potentiometry is an analytical method widely used in pharmaceutical analysis. In what galvanic cell its electromotive force (EMF) does not depend on the value of standard electrode potentials?
a. Galvanic cell with ionic transport
b. Reversible galvanic cell
*c. Concentration galvanic cell
d. Galvanic cell without ionic transport
e. Chemical galvanic cell
2301. Potentiometry is an analytical method widely used in pharmaceutical analysis. In what galvanic cell its electromotive force (EMF) does not depend on the value of standard electrode potentials?
a. Reversible galvanic cell
b. Galvanic cell with ionic transport
*c. Concentration galvanic cell
d. Chemical galvanic cell
e. Galvanic cell without ionic transport
2302. Potentiometry is one of the electrochemical methods of analysis. This method is based on measuring (determination) of:
a. Diffuse layer potential
b. Zeta-potential
c. Reference electrode potential
*d. Indicator electrode potential
e. Systemic redox potential
2303. Potentiometry is one of the electrochemical methods of analysis. This method is based on measuring (determination) of:
a. Reference electrode potential
b. Systemic redox potential
*c. Indicator electrode potential
d. Zeta-potential
e. Diffuse layer potential
2304. Potentiometry is one of the electrochemical methods of analysis. This method is based on measuring (determination) of:
a. Zeta-potential
b. Systemic redox potential
c. Reference electrode potential
*d. Indicator electrode potential
e. Diffuse layer potential
2305. Potentiometry is widely used in the analysis of medicinal products. What type of galvanic cell has the electromotive force that does not depend on the value of the standard electrode potential?
a. Chemical galvanic cell
b. Galvanic cell with ion transfer
*c. Concentration galvanic cell
d. Reversible galvanic cell
e. Galvanic cell without ion transfer
2306. Potentiometry is widely used in the analysis of medicinal products. What type of galvanic cell has the electromotive force that does not depend on the value of the standard electrode potential?
a. Galvanic cell without ion transfer
b. Galvanic cell with ion transfer
c. Chemical galvanic cell
*d. Concentration galvanic cell
e. Reversible galvanic cell
2307. Potentiometry is widely used in the analysis of medicinal products. What type of galvanic cell has the electromotive force that does not depend on the value of the standard electrode potential?
a. Reversible galvanic cell
*b. Concentration galvanic cell
c. Galvanic cell without ion transfer
d. Galvanic cell with ion transfer
e. Chemical galvanic cell
2308. Preliminary disinfection of air and working surfaces of the equipment was conducted in the operating room of the surgical inpatient unit. What method of sterilization would be the most advisable in this case?
a. Irradiation sterilization
*b. Ultraviolet irradiation
c. Formaldehyde vapor
d. High-frequency current
e. Flowing steam
2309. Preliminary disinfection of air and working surfaces of the equipment was conducted in the operating room of the surgical inpatient unit. What method of sterilization would be the most advisable in this case?
a. Irradiation sterilization
b. High-frequency current
c. Flowing steam
d. Formaldehyde vapor
*e. Ultraviolet irradiation
2310. Preliminary disinfection of air and working surfaces of the equipment was conducted in the operating room of the surgical inpatient unit. What method of sterilization would be the most advisable in this case?
a. Irradiation sterilization
b. High-frequency current
c. Formaldehyde vapor
d. Flowing steam
*e. Ultraviolet irradiation
2311. Presence of the pathogenic microorganisms in the air can be prognosticated according to the content of sanitary-indicative bacteria. Which bacteria indicate immediate epidemiologic danger?
a. Yeast fungi
*b. Haemolytic streptococci
c. Sarcinae
d. Micrococci
e. Mold fungi
2312. Presence of the pathogenic microorganisms in the air can be prognosticated according to the content of sanitary-indicative bacteria. Which bacteria indicate immediate epidemiologic danger?
a. Yeast fungi
b. Mold fungi
c. Sarcinae
d. Micrococci
*e. Haemolytic streptococci
2313. Presence of the pathogenic microorganisms in the air can be prognosticated according to the content of sanitary-indicative bacteria. Which bacteria indicate immediate epidemiologic danger?
a. Yeast fungi
b. Sarcinae
c. Micrococci
d. Mold fungi
*e. Haemolytic streptococci
2314. Primary and secondary nitroalkanes are tautomeric compounds. What tautomerism is characteristic of these compounds?
*a. Aci-nitro tautomerism
b. Keto-enol tautomerism
c. Tautomerism of azoles
d. Lactam-lactim tautomerism
e. Amino-imino tautomerism
2315. Primary and secondary nitroalkanes are tautomeric compounds. What tautomerism is characteristic of these compounds?
a. Amino-imino tautomerism
*b. Aci-nitro tautomerism
c. Keto-enol tautomerism
d. Lactam-lactim tautomerism
e. Tautomerism of azoles
2316. Primary and secondary nitroalkanes are tautomeric compounds. What tautomerism is characteristic of these compounds?
a. Tautomerism of azoles
*b. Aci-nitro tautomerism
c. Lactam-lactim tautomerism
d. Amino-imino tautomerism
e. Keto-enol tautomerism
2317. Primary protein structure is formed as the result of amino acid polymerization. What bonds between the amino acid residues are characteristic of this structure?
a. Hydrogen
b. Ion interaction
*c. Peptide
d. Hydrophobic
e. Electrostatic
2318. Primary protein structure is formed as the result of amino acid polymerization. What bonds between the amino acid residues are characteristic of this structure?
a. Ion interaction
b. Electrostatic
c. Hydrogen
d. Hydrophobic
*e. Peptide
2319. Primary protein structure is formed as the result of amino acid polymerization. What bonds between the amino acid residues are characteristic of this structure?
a. Ion interaction
b. Hydrogen
*c. Peptide
d. Hydrophobic
e. Electrostatic
2320. Production of digestive juices by gastrointestinal tract mucosa is regulated by various factors. What local hormone can affect this process?
*a. Gastrin
b. Angiotensin
c. Bradykinin
d. Calcitriol
e. Endorphin
2321. Production of digestive juices by gastrointestinal tract mucosa is regulated by various factors. What local hormone can affect this process?
*a. Gastrin
b. Calcitriol
c. Bradykinin
d. Endorphin
e. Angiotensin
2322. Production of digestive juices by gastrointestinal tract mucosa is regulated by various factors. What local hormone can affect this process?
a. Bradykinin
b. Angiotensin
c. Endorphin
*d. Gastrin
e. Calcitriol
2323. Production of injection solutions in pharmacies requires srtict control of sterilization quality. What is placed in autoclave sterilization box to ensure proper control?
a. Ampoule with fungi spores
*b. Ampoule with microbe spores
c. Ampoule with viruses
d. Ampoule with staphylococcus culture
e. Ampoule with colibacillus culture
2324. Production of injection solutions in pharmacies requires srtict control of sterilization quality. What is placed in autoclave sterilization box to ensure proper control?
a. Ampoule with fungi spores
b. Ampoule with viruses
c. Ampoule with colibacillus culture
d. Ampoule with staphylococcus culture
*e. Ampoule with microbe spores
2325. Production of injection solutions in pharmacies requires srtict control of sterilization quality. What is placed in autoclave sterilization box to ensure proper control?
a. Ampoule with staphylococcus culture
*b. Ampoule with microbe spores
c. Ampoule with fungi spores
d. Ampoule with viruses
e. Ampoule with colibacillus culture
2326. Prosenchyma cells with framed pores in their membranes were detected during microscopy of raw material fragment. Such cells are characteristic of the following tissues:
a. Integumentary tissue
b. Growth tissue
c. Strengthening tissue
d. Storage tissue
*e. Conducting tissue
2327. Prosenchyma cells with framed pores in their membranes were detected during microscopy of raw material fragment. Such cells are characteristic of the following tissues:
a. Storage tissue
b. Integumentary tissue
c. Strengthening tissue
*d. Conducting tissue
e. Growth tissue
2328. Prosenchyma cells with framed pores in their membranes were detected during microscopy of raw material fragment. Such cells are characteristic of the following tissues:
a. Strengthening tissue
*b. Conducting tissue
c. Integumentary tissue
d. Storage tissue
e. Growth tissue
2329. Proserin is a reverse acetylcholinesterase inhibitor. What is the mechanism of inhibitory action of the drug?
a. Covalent bond with enzyme substrate
b. Oxidation of iron ion in enzyme active center
*c. Competition with acetylcholine for enzyme active center
d. Enzyme denaturation
e. Covalent bond outside of enzyme active center
2330. Proserin is a reverse acetylcholinesterase inhibitor. What is the mechanism of inhibitory action of the drug?
a. Oxidation of iron ion in enzyme active center
*b. Competition with acetylcholine for enzyme active center
c. Covalent bond with enzyme substrate
d. Covalent bond outside of enzyme active center
e. Enzyme denaturation
2331. Proserin is a reverse acetylcholinesterase inhibitor. What is the mechanism of inhibitory action of the drug?
a. Oxidation of iron ion in enzyme active center
b. Covalent bond outside of enzyme active center
c. Enzyme denaturation
*d. Competition with acetylcholine for enzyme active center
e. Covalent bond with enzyme substrate
2332. Proteins are of great importance for vital functions. What value of pH results in zero electrophoretic mobility of gelatin (gelatin isoelectric point equals 4.7)?
*a. 4.7
b. 7.0
c. 5.5
d. 14.0
e. 9.4
2333. Proteins are of great importance for vital functions. What value of pH results in zero electrophoretic mobility of gelatin (gelatin isoelectric point equals 4.7)?
a. 14.0
*b. 4.7
c. 9.4
d. 7.0
e. 5.5
2334. Proteins are of great importance for vital functions. What value of pH results in zero electrophoretic mobility of gelatin (gelatin isoelectric point equals 4.7)?
a. 5.5
b. 7.0
*c. 4.7
d. 9.4
e. 14.0
2335. Proteins carry out various extremely important functions in the human body. Actin and myosin perform the following function:
*a. Contractile (motor)
b. Regulatory
c. Transport
d. Cogenetic
e. Receptor
2336. Proteins carry out various extremely important functions in the human body. Actin and myosin perform the following function:
a. Receptor
b. Cogenetic
c. Transport
d. Regulatory
*e. Contractile (motor)
2337. Proteins carry out various extremely important functions in the human body. Actin and myosin perform the following function:
a. Receptor
b. Transport
*c. Contractile (motor)
d. Regulatory
e. Cogenetic
2338. Pterin derivatives are used as antitumor agents, because they are the equivalents of the coenzyme required for the synthesis of thiamine monophosphate. This coenzyme is the active form of the following vitamin:
*a. Folic acid
b. Thiamine
c. Riboflavin
d. Lipoic acid
e. Ascorbic acid
2339. Pterin derivatives are used as antitumor agents, because they are the equivalents of the coenzyme required for the synthesis of thiamine monophosphate. This coenzyme is the active form of the following vitamin:
a. Lipoic acid
b. Ascorbic acid
c. Riboflavin
d. Thiamine
*e. Folic acid
2340. Pterin derivatives are used as antitumor agents, because they are the equivalents of the coenzyme required for the synthesis of thiamine monophosphate. This coenzyme is the active form of the following vitamin:
a. Riboflavin
b. Thiamine
c. Lipoic acid
d. Ascorbic acid
*e. Folic acid
2341. Quantitative content of hydrogen peroxide can be determined by means of the following self-indicator method:
*a. Permanganatometry
b. Nitritometry
c. Iodometry
d. Bromatometry
e. Argentometry
2342. Quantitative content of hydrogen peroxide can be determined by means of the following self-indicator method:
a. Argentometry
b. Nitritometry
*c. Permanganatometry
d. Bromatometry
e. Iodometry
2343. Quantitative content of hydrogen peroxide can be determined by means of the following self-indicator method:
a. Nitritometry
*b. Permanganatometry
c. Argentometry
d. Bromatometry
e. Iodometry
2344. Quantitative content of oxalic acid can be determined by means of permanganatometry. How to determine equivalence point for this kind of titration?
a. With adsorption indicator
*b. When titrate changes its color after another drop of process solution is added
c. With specific indicator
d. With redox indicator diphenylamine
e. With pH indicator
2345. Quantitative content of oxalic acid can be determined by means of permanganatometry. How to determine equivalence point for this kind of titration?
a. With redox indicator diphenylamine
b. With pH indicator
c. With adsorption indicator
d. With specific indicator
*e. When titrate changes its color after another drop of process solution is added
2346. Quantitative content of oxalic acid can be determined by means of permanganatometry. How to determine equivalence point for this kind of titration?
a. With redox indicator diphenylamine
b. With specific indicator
c. With adsorption indicator
d. With pH indicator
*e. When titrate changes its color after another drop of process solution is added
2347. Quantitative determination of iodides by Fajans method is performed with adsorption indicators. The following can be used as an adsorption indicator:
*a. Eosin
b. Diphenylamine
c. Methyl orange
d. Phenolphthalein
e. Murexide
2348. Quantitative determination of iodides by Fajans method is performed with adsorption indicators. The following can be used as an adsorption indicator:
a. Diphenylamine
*b. Eosin
c. Phenolphthalein
d. Murexide
e. Methyl orange
2349. Quantitative determination of iodides by Fajans method is performed with adsorption indicators. The following can be used as an adsorption indicator:
a. Murexide
b. Methyl orange
*c. Eosin
d. Diphenylamine
e. Phenolphthalein
2350. Quite often the soil may contain a number of pathogenic microorganisms. Causative agents of the following disease may exist in the soil for a long time:
a. Dysentery
b. Viral hepatitis
*c. Anthrax
d. Pertussis
e. Diphtheria
2351. Quite often the soil may contain a number of pathogenic microorganisms. Causative agents of the following disease may exist in the soil for a long time:
a. Pertussis
b. Diphtheria
c. Dysentery
*d. Anthrax
e. Viral hepatitis
2352. Quite often the soil may contain a number of pathogenic microorganisms. Causative agents of the following disease may exist in the soil for a long time:
a. Pertussis
b. Viral hepatitis
c. Dysentery
d. Diphtheria
*e. Anthrax
2353. Racemose clusters of calcium carbonate crystals are detected among the waste products of a protoplast. These crystals are:
a. Crystal druses
b. Isolated crystals
c. Styloid crystals
d. Raphides
*e. Cystoliths
2354. Racemose clusters of calcium carbonate crystals are detected among the waste products of a protoplast. These crystals are:
a. Isolated crystals
b. Crystal druses
c. Raphides
*d. Cystoliths
e. Styloid crystals
2355. Racemose clusters of calcium carbonate crystals are detected among the waste products of a protoplast. These crystals are:
a. Styloid crystals
b. Crystal druses
c. Raphides
d. Isolated crystals
*e. Cystoliths
2356. Rapid analysis of benzoate ions by means of Pharmacopoeia reaction with iron(III) chloride produces:
a. Black precipitate
*b. Pink-yellow precipitate
c. Blue precipitate
d. Green precipitate
e. Red precipitate
2357. Rapid analysis of benzoate ions by means of Pharmacopoeia reaction with iron(III) chloride produces:
a. Black precipitate
b. Blue precipitate
*c. Pink-yellow precipitate
d. Green precipitate
e. Red precipitate
2358. Rapid analysis of benzoate ions by means of Pharmacopoeia reaction with iron(III) chloride produces:
a. Blue precipitate
b. Black precipitate
c. Green precipitate
*d. Pink-yellow precipitate
e. Red precipitate
2359. Rapid growth of tumor node and its progressing malignant change (malignization) is observed in a patient. The described developments are characteristic of the following stage of tumor growth:
*a. Progression
b. Inactivation
c. Transformation
d. Exudation
e. Promotion
2360. Rapid growth of tumor node and its progressing malignant change (malignization) is observed in a patient. The described developments are characteristic of the following stage of tumor growth:
a. Exudation
b. Inactivation
c. Transformation
d. Promotion
*e. Progression
2361. Rapid growth of tumor node and its progressing malignant change (malignization) is observed in a patient. The described developments are characteristic of the following stage of tumor growth:
a. Inactivation
b. Transformation
*c. Progression
d. Promotion
e. Exudation
2362. Reaction of sodium ions with potassium hexahydroxoantimonate (V) in neutral medium produces precipitate. Specify the color of this precipitate:
a. Green
b. Red
c. Yellow
d. Blue
*e. White
2363. Reaction of sodium ions with potassium hexahydroxoantimonate (V) in neutral medium produces precipitate. Specify the color of this precipitate:
a. Red
*b. White
c. Yellow
d. Green
e. Blue
2364. Reaction of sodium ions with potassium hexahydroxoantimonate (V) in neutral medium produces precipitate. Specify the color of this precipitate:
a. Yellow
b. Blue
c. Green
*d. White
e. Red
2365. Recommend the patient with glaucoma an M-cholinomimetic agent:
a. Atropine sulfate
*b. Pilocarpine hydrochloride
c. Levomycetin (Chloramphenicol)
d. Ephedrine hydrochloride
e. Sulfacyl-sodium (Sulfacetamide)
2366. Recommend the patient with glaucoma an M-cholinomimetic agent:
a. Ephedrine hydrochloride
b. Atropine sulfate
c. Levomycetin (Chloramphenicol)
*d. Pilocarpine hydrochloride
e. Sulfacyl-sodium (Sulfacetamide)
2367. Recommend the patient with glaucoma an M-cholinomimetic agent:
a. Levomycetin (Chloramphenicol)
b. Ephedrine hydrochloride
c. Atropine sulfate
d. Sulfacyl-sodium (Sulfacetamide)
*e. Pilocarpine hydrochloride
2368. Research of reaction rate dependance from various factors allows to intensify technological processes. What factor textbfHAS NO effect on reaction rate constant?
a. Solid substance dispersion degree
*b. Reacting agents concentration
c. Temperature
d. Solvent nature
e. Reagents nature
2369. Research of reaction rate dependance from various factors allows to intensify technological processes. What factor textbfHAS NO effect on reaction rate constant?
a. Solid substance dispersion degree
b. Reagents nature
*c. Reacting agents concentration
d. Solvent nature
e. Temperature
2370. Research of reaction rate dependance from various factors allows to intensify technological processes. What factor textbfHAS NO effect on reaction rate constant?
a. Solvent nature
b. Solid substance dispersion degree
*c. Reacting agents concentration
d. Temperature
e. Reagents nature
2371. Rhizome and roots of Inula helenium have cavities without clear inner margins that are filled with essential oils. What are they?
a. Non-articulated laticifers
b. Resin ducts
*c. Lysigenous cavities
d. Schizogenous cavities
e. Articulated laticifers
2372. Rhizome and roots of Inula helenium have cavities without clear inner margins that are filled with essential oils. What are they?
a. Resin ducts
b. Schizogenous cavities
*c. Lysigenous cavities
d. Non-articulated laticifers
e. Articulated laticifers
2373. Rhizome and roots of Inula helenium have cavities without clear inner margins that are filled with essential oils. What are they?
a. Schizogenous cavities
b. Articulated laticifers
c. Resin ducts
*d. Lysigenous cavities
e. Non-articulated laticifers
2374. Sabin polyvalent oral vaccine is used for planned immunization of children against poliomyelitis. However, this vaccine is absolutely contraindicated for the:
*a. Children with congenital or acquired immunodeficiencies
b. Adolescents
c. Children with recent medical history of infectious diseases
d. Preschoolers
e. Children vaccinated with Salk vaccine
2375. Sabin polyvalent oral vaccine is used for planned immunization of children against poliomyelitis. However, this vaccine is absolutely contraindicated for the:
a. Adolescents
b. Children vaccinated with Salk vaccine
c. Preschoolers
*d. Children with congenital or acquired immunodeficiencies
e. Children with recent medical history of infectious diseases
2376. Sabin polyvalent oral vaccine is used for planned immunization of children against poliomyelitis. However, this vaccine is absolutely contraindicated for the:
a. Children vaccinated with Salk vaccine
b. Children with recent medical history of infectious diseases
*c. Children with congenital or acquired immunodeficiencies
d. Adolescents
e. Preschoolers
2377. Salicylic acid and its derivatives are widely used in medicine. This compound belongs to the following class of chemicals:
a. Aldehydes
b. Heterocyclic compounds
c. Alcohols
*d. Hydroxycarboxylic acids
e. Alkanes
2378. Salicylic acid and its derivatives are widely used in medicine. This compound belongs to the following class of chemicals:
a. Heterocyclic compounds
b. Alcohols
c. Alkanes
d. Aldehydes
*e. Hydroxycarboxylic acids
2379. Salicylic acid and its derivatives are widely used in medicine. This compound belongs to the following class of chemicals:
a. Heterocyclic compounds
b. Aldehydes
c. Alcohols
d. Alkanes
*e. Hydroxycarboxylic acids
2380. Sanitary microbiological investigation of potable water has detected coliphages. What conclusion can be made about the sanitary-hygienic status of this water?
*a. Fecal contamination
b. The water is safe to drink after boiling
c. The water is safe to drink
d. The water is for industrial use only
e. Artesian water
2381. Sanitary microbiological investigation of potable water has detected coliphages. What conclusion can be made about the sanitary-hygienic status of this water?
a. Artesian water
b. The water is safe to drink after boiling
*c. Fecal contamination
d. The water is safe to drink
e. The water is for industrial use only
2382. Sanitary microbiological investigation of potable water has detected coliphages. What conclusion can be made about the sanitary-hygienic status of this water?
a. The water is safe to drink
b. Artesian water
c. The water is safe to drink after boiling
*d. Fecal contamination
e. The water is for industrial use only
2383. Select a Brassicaceae family plant that contains glycosides similar in action to those obtained from foxglove:
*a. Erysimum canescens
b. Arctostaphylos uva-ursi
c. Urtica dioica
d. Primula officinalis
e. Polygonum aviculare
2384. Select a Brassicaceae family plant that contains glycosides similar in action to those obtained from foxglove:
a. Primula officinalis
b. Polygonum aviculare
*c. Erysimum canescens
d. Urtica dioica
e. Arctostaphylos uva-ursi
2385. Select a Brassicaceae family plant that contains glycosides similar in action to those obtained from foxglove:
a. Primula officinalis
b. Urtica dioica
c. Polygonum aviculare
d. Arctostaphylos uva-ursi
*e. Erysimum canescens
2386. Select a metallochromic indicator from the list below.
a. Eosin
*b. Murexide
c. Litmus
d. Starch
e. Methyl orange
2387. Select a metallochromic indicator from the list below.
a. Eosin
b. Litmus
c. Methyl orange
*d. Murexide
e. Starch
2388. Select a metallochromic indicator from the list below.
a. Methyl orange
b. Eosin
c. Starch
*d. Murexide
e. Litmus
2389. Select from the list a compound that is a pyridinecarboxylic acid:
a. Benzoic acid
*b. Nicotinic acid
c. Barbituric acid
d. Malic acid
e. Uric acid
2390. Select from the list a compound that is a pyridinecarboxylic acid:
a. Benzoic acid
b. Uric acid
c. Barbituric acid
d. Malic acid
*e. Nicotinic acid
2391. Select from the list a compound that is a pyridinecarboxylic acid:
a. Uric acid
b. Barbituric acid
c. Malic acid
*d. Nicotinic acid
e. Benzoic acid
2392. Select from the list an adsorption indicator:
*a. Eosin
b. Methyl-orange
c. Sulfosalicylic acid
d. Phenolphthalein
e. Eriochrome black Т
2393. Select from the list an adsorption indicator:
a. Methyl-orange
b. Eriochrome black Т
c. Sulfosalicylic acid
*d. Eosin
e. Phenolphthalein
2394. Select from the list an adsorption indicator:
a. Phenolphthalein
b. Methyl-orange
c. Eriochrome black Т
d. Sulfosalicylic acid
*e. Eosin
2395. Select from the list an antiprotozoal drug with an anti-Helicobacter pylori effect.
a. Aciclovir
b. Isoniazid
*c. Metronidazole
d. Benzylpenicillin sodium salt
e. Rifampicin
2396. Select from the list an antiprotozoal drug with an anti-Helicobacter pylori effect.
a. Isoniazid
*b. Metronidazole
c. Aciclovir
d. Rifampicin
e. Benzylpenicillin sodium salt
2397. Select from the list an antiprotozoal drug with an anti-Helicobacter pylori effect.
a. Rifampicin
b. Isoniazid
c. Aciclovir
d. Benzylpenicillin sodium salt
*e. Metronidazole
2398. Select ketose from the monosaccharides listed below:
a. Glucose
b. Mannose
c. Arabinose
*d. Fructose
e. Ribose
2399. Select ketose from the monosaccharides listed below:
a. Mannose
b. Arabinose
*c. Fructose
d. Glucose
e. Ribose
2400. Select ketose from the monosaccharides listed below:
a. Ribose
b. Mannose
c. Glucose
d. Arabinose
*e. Fructose
2401. Select lyophilic systems among the dispersion systems listed below.
*a. Surfactant solutions
b. Emulsions
c. Suspensions
d. Solid foams
e. Sols
2402. Select lyophilic systems among the dispersion systems listed below.
*a. Surfactant solutions
b. Solid foams
c. Suspensions
d. Emulsions
e. Sols
2403. Select lyophilic systems among the dispersion systems listed below.
*a. Surfactant solutions
b. Sols
c. Emulsions
d. Solid foams
e. Suspensions
2404. Select the hepatoprotective drugs from the list below:
a. Allochol, Cholenzym
*b. Essentiale (Phospholipides), Thiotriasoline
c. No-Spa (drotaverine), papaverine hydrochloride
d. Oxaphenamide (Osalmid), Nicodin
e. Festal, Panzinorm (Pancreatin)
2405. Select the hepatoprotective drugs from the list below:
a. Allochol, Cholenzym
b. Festal, Panzinorm (Pancreatin)
*c. Essentiale (Phospholipides), Thiotriasoline
d. No-Spa (drotaverine), papaverine hydrochloride
e. Oxaphenamide (Osalmid), Nicodin
2406. Select the hepatoprotective drugs from the list below:
a. No-Spa (drotaverine), papaverine hydrochloride
b. Allochol, Cholenzym
*c. Essentiale (Phospholipides), Thiotriasoline
d. Festal, Panzinorm (Pancreatin)
e. Oxaphenamide (Osalmid), Nicodin
2407. Selective solvents are used in laboratories and factories to isolate and refine essential oils, alkaloids, antibiotics, and other pharmaceutical subctances. This process is called:
*a. Extraction
b. Coagulation
c. Flocculation
d. Flotation
e. Sedimentation
2408. Selective solvents are used in laboratories and factories to isolate and refine essential oils, alkaloids, antibiotics, and other pharmaceutical subctances. This process is called:
a. Coagulation
b. Flotation
c. Sedimentation
d. Flocculation
*e. Extraction
2409. Selective solvents are used in laboratories and factories to isolate and refine essential oils, alkaloids, antibiotics, and other pharmaceutical subctances. This process is called:
a. Flotation
*b. Extraction
c. Sedimentation
d. Coagulation
e. Flocculation
2410. Separation of substances in chromatography is based on the ability of solutes:
a. To distribute between two mobile phases
b. To distribute between two stationary phases
c. To precipitate
d. To dissolve
*e. To distribute between the mobile and stationary phases
2411. Separation of substances in chromatography is based on the ability of solutes:
a. To precipitate
b. To dissolve
c. To distribute between two stationary phases
*d. To distribute between the mobile and stationary phases
e. To distribute between two mobile phases
2412. Separation of substances in chromatography is based on the ability of solutes:
a. To precipitate
b. To distribute between two stationary phases
*c. To distribute between the mobile and stationary phases
d. To dissolve
e. To distribute between two mobile phases
2413. Separation of substances in gas-liquid chromatography occurs due to the different speed of movement of substances through the column. What is the mobile phase in this method of analysis?
*a. Carrier gas
b. Water
c. Organic solvent
d. Liquid phases
e. Solid carrier
2414. Separation of substances in gas-liquid chromatography occurs due to the different speed of movement of substances through the column. What is the mobile phase in this method of analysis?
a. Liquid phases
b. Organic solvent
c. Water
d. Solid carrier
*e. Carrier gas
2415. Separation of substances in gas-liquid chromatography occurs due to the different speed of movement of substances through the column. What is the mobile phase in this method of analysis?
a. Water
b. Liquid phases
c. Organic solvent
*d. Carrier gas
e. Solid carrier
2416. Serology is the main method of congenital toxoplasmosis diagnostics. What reaction is used to diagnose this pathology?
a. Agglutination
b. Precipitation
*c. Complement fixation
d. Bacteriolysis
e. Neutralization
2417. Serology is the main method of congenital toxoplasmosis diagnostics. What reaction is used to diagnose this pathology?
a. Neutralization
b. Bacteriolysis
*c. Complement fixation
d. Agglutination
e. Precipitation
2418. Serology is the main method of congenital toxoplasmosis diagnostics. What reaction is used to diagnose this pathology?
a. Precipitation
*b. Complement fixation
c. Agglutination
d. Bacteriolysis
e. Neutralization
2419. Serum total protein is one of metabolic indicators. What reaction is usually used in clinical laboratories to measure this value?
a. Ninhydrin
b. Xanthoproteic
c. Fohl
d. Nitroprusside
*e. Biuret
2420. Serum total protein is one of metabolic indicators. What reaction is usually used in clinical laboratories to measure this value?
a. Nitroprusside
b. Fohl
c. Xanthoproteic
d. Ninhydrin
*e. Biuret
2421. Serum total protein is one of metabolic indicators. What reaction is usually used in clinical laboratories to measure this value?
a. Xanthoproteic
b. Ninhydrin
*c. Biuret
d. Nitroprusside
e. Fohl
2422. Short lignified stem is characteristic of the Allium cepa genera. It is a part of modified sprout that is called:
a. Phylloclade
b. Tuber
c. Rhizome
*d. Bulb
e. Tendril
2423. Short lignified stem is characteristic of the Allium cepa genera. It is a part of modified sprout that is called:
a. Tendril
b. Rhizome
c. Tuber
*d. Bulb
e. Phylloclade
2424. Short lignified stem is characteristic of the Allium cepa genera. It is a part of modified sprout that is called:
a. Tuber
b. Rhizome
c. Phylloclade
d. Tendril
*e. Bulb
2425. Silver nitrate solution has been added to the solution containing anions of the first analytical group. It resulted in yellow precipitate. That means the following are present in the solution:
a. Arsenate ions
b. Sulphate ions
c. Iodide ions
d. Bromide ions
*e. Arsenite ions
2426. Silver nitrate solution has been added to the solution containing anions of the first analytical group. It resulted in yellow precipitate. That means the following are present in the solution:
a. Iodide ions
b. Bromide ions
c. Sulphate ions
*d. Arsenite ions
e. Arsenate ions
2427. Silver nitrate solution has been added to the solution containing anions of the first analytical group. It resulted in yellow precipitate. That means the following are present in the solution:
a. Sulphate ions
*b. Arsenite ions
c. Bromide ions
d. Iodide ions
e. Arsenate ions
2428. Silver nitrate solution was added into a solution with anions of the first analytical group. A yellow precipitate was produced as the result, which indicates that this solution contained:
a. Bromide ions
b. Iodide ions
c. Sulfate ions
*d. Arsenite ions
e. Arsenate ions
2429. Silver nitrate solution was added into a solution with anions of the first analytical group. A yellow precipitate was produced as the result, which indicates that this solution contained:
a. Sulfate ions
b. Arsenate ions
c. Bromide ions
d. Iodide ions
*e. Arsenite ions
2430. Silver nitrate solution was added into a solution with anions of the first analytical group. A yellow precipitate was produced as the result, which indicates that this solution contained:
a. Sulfate ions
b. Arsenate ions
c. Iodide ions
*d. Arsenite ions
e. Bromide ions
2431. Single-use syringes produced at a medical equipment factory need to be sterilized. What sterilization method would be the most advisable for this type of medical equipment?
a. Dry heat
b. Tyndallization
*c. Radiation sterilization (gamma-radiation)
d. Autoclaving
e. Pasteurization
2432. Single-use syringes produced at a medical equipment factory need to be sterilized. What sterilization method would be the most advisable for this type of medical equipment?
a. Pasteurization
b. Autoclaving
*c. Radiation sterilization (gamma-radiation)
d. Dry heat
e. Tyndallization
2433. Single-use syringes produced at a medical equipment factory need to be sterilized. What sterilization method would be the most advisable for this type of medical equipment?
a. Pasteurization
b. Autoclaving
c. Tyndallization
*d. Radiation sterilization (gamma-radiation)
e. Dry heat
2434. Smears prepared from the cerebrospinal fluid sediment and stained using the Gram technique are studied in diagnostics of meningitis. What finding confirms the diagnosis of meningococcal infection?
a. Diplococci enclosed within a capsule
*b. Gram-negative diplococci located inside leukocytes and outside of them
c. Lancet-shaped Gram-positive diplococci
d. Gram-positive diplococci located inside leukocytes
e. Gram-negative coccobacteria located inside leukocytes
2435. Smears prepared from the cerebrospinal fluid sediment and stained using the Gram technique are studied in diagnostics of meningitis. What finding confirms the diagnosis of meningococcal infection?
a. Gram-positive diplococci located inside leukocytes
b. Diplococci enclosed within a capsule
c. Lancet-shaped Gram-positive diplococci
d. Gram-negative coccobacteria located inside leukocytes
*e. Gram-negative diplococci located inside leukocytes and outside of them
2436. Smears prepared from the cerebrospinal fluid sediment and stained using the Gram technique are studied in diagnostics of meningitis. What finding confirms the diagnosis of meningococcal infection?
a. Gram-positive diplococci located inside leukocytes
b. Lancet-shaped Gram-positive diplococci
c. Gram-negative coccobacteria located inside leukocytes
d. Diplococci enclosed within a capsule
*e. Gram-negative diplococci located inside leukocytes and outside of them
2437. Sodium hexanitrocobaltate(III) is used to determine the presence of potassium cations in a solution. What visual analytical effect is observed in this case?
*a. Formation of a yellow precipitate
b. Formation of a white precipitate
c. Formation of a black precipitate
d. Formation of a blue precipitate
e. Formation of a violet precipitate
2438. Sodium hexanitrocobaltate(III) is used to determine the presence of potassium cations in a solution. What visual analytical effect is observed in this case?
a. Formation of a violet precipitate
b. Formation of a white precipitate
*c. Formation of a yellow precipitate
d. Formation of a black precipitate
e. Formation of a blue precipitate
2439. Sodium hexanitrocobaltate(III) is used to determine the presence of potassium cations in a solution. What visual analytical effect is observed in this case?
a. Formation of a white precipitate
b. Formation of a blue precipitate
c. Formation of a violet precipitate
d. Formation of a black precipitate
*e. Formation of a yellow precipitate
2440. Sol Al(OH)_3 was produced as a result of treatment of freshly prepared Al(OH)_3 precipitate with a small amount of HCl solution. What phenomenon underlies the sol production?
a. Chemical condensation
b. Physical condensation
c. Mechanical dispersion
d. Washing with a solvent
*e. Chemical peptization
2441. Sol Al(OH)_3 was produced as a result of treatment of freshly prepared Al(OH)_3 precipitate with a small amount of HCl solution. What phenomenon underlies the sol production?
a. Mechanical dispersion
b. Physical condensation
c. Washing with a solvent
d. Chemical condensation
*e. Chemical peptization
2442. Sol Al(OH)_3 was produced as a result of treatment of freshly prepared Al(OH)_3 precipitate with a small amount of HCl solution. What phenomenon underlies the sol production?
a. Physical condensation
b. Mechanical dispersion
c. Chemical condensation
d. Washing with a solvent
*e. Chemical peptization
2443. Solutions of colloidal surfactants are typical representatives of lyophilic dispersion systems. What is a characteristic feature of colloidal surfactants?
*a. Amphiphilicity (Diphilicity)
b. Polarity
c. Ionogenicity
d. Non-polarity
e. Non-ionogenicity
2444. Solutions of colloidal surfactants are typical representatives of lyophilic dispersion systems. What is a characteristic feature of colloidal surfactants?
a. Ionogenicity
b. Non-polarity
c. Polarity
*d. Amphiphilicity (Diphilicity)
e. Non-ionogenicity
2445. Solutions of colloidal surfactants are typical representatives of lyophilic dispersion systems. What is a characteristic feature of colloidal surfactants?
a. Non-ionogenicity
b. Ionogenicity
c. Polarity
d. Non-polarity
*e. Amphiphilicity (Diphilicity)
2446. Solutions of high-molecular compounds can be precipitated by concentrated electrolyte solutions. Name this process:
*a. Salting-out
b. Syneresis
c. Coacervation
d. Coagulation
e. Peptization
2447. Solutions of high-molecular compounds can be precipitated by concentrated electrolyte solutions. Name this process:
*a. Salting-out
b. Syneresis
c. Coagulation
d. Peptization
e. Coacervation
2448. Solutions of high-molecular compounds can be precipitated by concentrated electrolyte solutions. Name this process:
a. Coacervation
b. Coagulation
*c. Salting-out
d. Peptization
e. Syneresis
2449. Solutions of some electrolytes are used as medicines. What is the maximum value of the isotonic coefficient for MgSO_4 solution?
*a. 2
b. 5
c. 7
d. 4
e. 3
2450. Solutions of some electrolytes are used as medicines. What is the maximum value of the isotonic coefficient for MgSO_4 solution?
a. 7
*b. 2
c. 4
d. 5
e. 3
2451. Solutions of some electrolytes are used as medicines. What is the maximum value of the isotonic coefficient for MgSO_4 solution?
a. 7
b. 3
c. 4
d. 5
*e. 2
2452. Some hormones are synthesized from amino acids in the body. What amino acid is the precursor to the thyroxine hormone?
*a. Tyrosine
b. Glutamine
c. Arginine
d. Histidine
e. Cysteine
2453. Some hormones are synthesized from amino acids in the body. What amino acid is the precursor to the thyroxine hormone?
a. Glutamine
b. Histidine
c. Arginine
*d. Tyrosine
e. Cysteine
2454. Some hormones are synthesized from amino acids in the body. What amino acid is the precursor to the thyroxine hormone?
a. Histidine
b. Glutamine
*c. Tyrosine
d. Arginine
e. Cysteine
2455. Some leaf cells have lignified membranes. These cells are called:
*a. Sclereids
b. Collenchyma
c. Trichomes
d. Sieve tubes
e. Companion cells
2456. Some leaf cells have lignified membranes. These cells are called:
a. Collenchyma
b. Trichomes
c. Companion cells
*d. Sclereids
e. Sieve tubes
2457. Some leaf cells have lignified membranes. These cells are called:
a. Trichomes
b. Sieve tubes
c. Companion cells
d. Collenchyma
*e. Sclereids
2458. Some medicinal plants are poisonous. Select a poisonous plant from the list below:
*a. Digitalis purpurea
b. Origaum vulgare
c. Thymus vulgaris
d. Salvia officinalis
e. Thymus serpilum
2459. Some medicinal plants are poisonous. Select a poisonous plant from the list below:
a. Origaum vulgare
b. Thymus serpilum
c. Thymus vulgaris
*d. Digitalis purpurea
e. Salvia officinalis
2460. Some medicinal plants are poisonous. Select a poisonous plant from the list below:
a. Origaum vulgare
b. Thymus vulgaris
c. Salvia officinalis
*d. Digitalis purpurea
e. Thymus serpilum
2461. Some medicines are colloidal solutions. Stabilizers are added to them to increase their aggregate stability. What substances are called stabilizers?
a. Substances that can increase the free energy of a system
b. Substances that have no effect on the interfacial tension
c. Substances that first increase the interfacial tension, and then reduce it over time
*d. Substances that can be adsorbed and reduce the interfacial tension
e. Substances that can increase the interfacial tension
2462. Some medicines are colloidal solutions. Stabilizers are added to them to increase their aggregate stability. What substances are called stabilizers?
a. Substances that can increase the interfacial tension
*b. Substances that can be adsorbed and reduce the interfacial tension
c. Substances that have no effect on the interfacial tension
d. Substances that can increase the free energy of a system
e. Substances that first increase the interfacial tension, and then reduce it over time
2463. Some medicines are colloidal solutions. Stabilizers are added to them to increase their aggregate stability. What substances are called stabilizers?
a. Substances that have no effect on the interfacial tension
b. Substances that can increase the interfacial tension
*c. Substances that can be adsorbed and reduce the interfacial tension
d. Substances that can increase the free energy of a system
e. Substances that first increase the interfacial tension, and then reduce it over time
2464. Specific reactions used in qualitative analysis make it possible to:
a. Detect only anions
*b. Detect an ion without previous separation of other ions
c. Detect an ion with previous separation
d. Detect only cations
e. Detect only a certain group of ions
2465. Specific reactions used in qualitative analysis make it possible to:
a. Detect only anions
b. Detect only cations
c. Detect an ion with previous separation
d. Detect only a certain group of ions
*e. Detect an ion without previous separation of other ions
2466. Specific reactions used in qualitative analysis make it possible to:
a. Detect only cations
b. Detect only anions
c. Detect an ion with previous separation
d. Detect only a certain group of ions
*e. Detect an ion without previous separation of other ions
2467. Specify the analgesic that affects opiate receptors and can cause development of tolerance and dependence:
*a. Morphine
b. Medazepam
c. Haloperidol
d. Voltaren (Diclofenac sodium)
e. Phenobarbital
2468. Specify the analgesic that affects opiate receptors and can cause development of tolerance and dependence:
a. Haloperidol
b. Medazepam
c. Voltaren (Diclofenac sodium)
d. Phenobarbital
*e. Morphine
2469. Specify the analgesic that affects opiate receptors and can cause development of tolerance and dependence:
a. Haloperidol
b. Phenobarbital
*c. Morphine
d. Voltaren (Diclofenac sodium)
e. Medazepam
2470. Specify the standard solution (titrant) for the iodometric determination of oxidants:
a. KBrO_3
*b. Na_2S_2O_3
c. KMnO_4
d. I_2
e. K_2Cr_2O_7
2471. Specify the standard solution (titrant) for the iodometric determination of oxidants:
a. K_2Cr_2O_7
b. I_2
c. KMnO_4
d. KBrO_3
*e. Na_2S_2O_3
2472. Specify the standard solution (titrant) for the iodometric determination of oxidants:
a. K_2Cr_2O_7
b. KBrO_3
c. KMnO_4
d. I_2
*e. Na_2S_2O_3
2473. Specify the standard solutions that are used in permanganatometry to quantify the oxidants by the residual titration method:
*a. Potassium permanganate, iron (II) sulfate
b. Potassium dichromate, sodium thiosulfate
c. Potassium bromate, sodium thiosulfate
d. Potassium iodate, sodium thiosulfate
e. Cerium (IV) sulfate, iron (II) sulfate
2474. Specify the standard solutions that are used in permanganatometry to quantify the oxidants by the residual titration method:
a. Cerium (IV) sulfate, iron (II) sulfate
b. Potassium dichromate, sodium thiosulfate
c. Potassium iodate, sodium thiosulfate
*d. Potassium permanganate, iron (II) sulfate
e. Potassium bromate, sodium thiosulfate
2475. Specify the standard solutions that are used in permanganatometry to quantify the oxidants by the residual titration method:
a. Potassium iodate, sodium thiosulfate
*b. Potassium permanganate, iron (II) sulfate
c. Potassium dichromate, sodium thiosulfate
d. Cerium (IV) sulfate, iron (II) sulfate
e. Potassium bromate, sodium thiosulfate
2476. Specify the substance that results from the following reaction: CH equiv CHxrightarrow HOH, medspace Hg^2+ ?
a. Ethanol
b. Acetic acid
c. Propanone
*d. Ethanal
e. Propanal
2477. Specify the substance that results from the following reaction: CH equiv CHxrightarrow HOH, medspace Hg^2+ ?
a. Ethanol
b. Propanal
c. Acetic acid
*d. Ethanal
e. Propanone
2478. Specify the substance that results from the following reaction: CH equiv CHxrightarrow HOH, medspace Hg^2+ ?
a. Propanal
b. Ethanol
c. Propanone
*d. Ethanal
e. Acetic acid
2479. Specify what method of redox titration requires the use of specific indicator - starch - to fix the end point:
a. Bromatometry
*b. Iodometry
c. Cerimetry
d. Nitritometry
e. Permanganatometry
2480. Specify what method of redox titration requires the use of specific indicator - starch - to fix the end point:
a. Cerimetry
b. Nitritometry
c. Bromatometry
*d. Iodometry
e. Permanganatometry
2481. Specify what method of redox titration requires the use of specific indicator - starch - to fix the end point:
a. Nitritometry
b. Bromatometry
c. Cerimetry
*d. Iodometry
e. Permanganatometry
2482. Sputum analysis by means of flotation and Ziehl-Neelsen staining technique revealed red long thin bacilli, both isolated and arranged in clusters. What disease is caused by this pathogen?
a. Actinomycosis
*b. Tuberculosis
c. Tularemia
d. Diphtheria
e. Pertussis
2483. Sputum analysis by means of flotation and Ziehl-Neelsen staining technique revealed red long thin bacilli, both isolated and arranged in clusters. What disease is caused by this pathogen?
a. Tularemia
b. Actinomycosis
*c. Tuberculosis
d. Diphtheria
e. Pertussis
2484. Sputum analysis by means of flotation and Ziehl-Neelsen staining technique revealed red long thin bacilli, both isolated and arranged in clusters. What disease is caused by this pathogen?
a. Tularemia
b. Diphtheria
c. Actinomycosis
*d. Tuberculosis
e. Pertussis
2485. Staphylococci grow well on common nutrient media. However, when isolating pure cultures from patients, blood agar and yolk-salt agar are used for inoculation. What is the purpose of using these nutrient media?
a. To determine the mobility of the bacteria
b. To determine the tinctorial properties
*c. To determine the pathogenicity factors
d. To study the antigenic properties
e. To measure the sensitivity to antibiotics
2486. Staphylococci grow well on common nutrient media. However, when isolating pure cultures from patients, blood agar and yolk-salt agar are used for inoculation. What is the purpose of using these nutrient media?
a. To determine the tinctorial properties
b. To measure the sensitivity to antibiotics
c. To study the antigenic properties
d. To determine the mobility of the bacteria
*e. To determine the pathogenicity factors
2487. Staphylococci grow well on common nutrient media. However, when isolating pure cultures from patients, blood agar and yolk-salt agar are used for inoculation. What is the purpose of using these nutrient media?
a. To measure the sensitivity to antibiotics
b. To determine the mobility of the bacteria
c. To study the antigenic properties
d. To determine the tinctorial properties
*e. To determine the pathogenicity factors
2488. Stone cells shaped like dumbbells or tubular bones were detected in begonia leaves. What type of cells do they belong to?
a. Astrosclereids
b. Trichosclereids
c. Fibrosclereids
*d. Osteosclereids
e. Macrosclereids
2489. Stone cells shaped like dumbbells or tubular bones were detected in begonia leaves. What type of cells do they belong to?
a. Trichosclereids
b. Fibrosclereids
*c. Osteosclereids
d. Macrosclereids
e. Astrosclereids
2490. Stone cells shaped like dumbbells or tubular bones were detected in begonia leaves. What type of cells do they belong to?
a. Trichosclereids
b. Macrosclereids
c. Fibrosclereids
*d. Osteosclereids
e. Astrosclereids
2491. Streptomycin like other aminoglycosides, by binding to the 30S subunit of ribosomes, prevents the attachment of formylmethionyl-tRNA) What process is being disrupted as a result of this effect?
a. Transcription initiation
b. Translation termination
c. Replication initiation
d. Transcription termination
*e. Translation initiation
2492. Streptomycin like other aminoglycosides, by binding to the 30S subunit of ribosomes, prevents the attachment of formylmethionyl-tRNA) What process is being disrupted as a result of this effect?
a. Translation termination
b. Replication initiation
*c. Translation initiation
d. Transcription termination
e. Transcription initiation
2493. Streptomycin like other aminoglycosides, by binding to the 30S subunit of ribosomes, prevents the attachment of formylmethionyl-tRNA) What process is being disrupted as a result of this effect?
a. Translation termination
b. Replication initiation
c. Transcription termination
*d. Translation initiation
e. Transcription initiation
2494. Sullfur sol was obtained by adding 5 mL of a solution of sulfur in alcohol into 20 mL of distilled water. The sol was obtained by the following method:
a. Chemical condensation
b. Reduction reaction
*c. Solvent substitution
d. Hydrolysis reaction
e. Double exchange reaction
2495. Sullfur sol was obtained by adding 5 mL of a solution of sulfur in alcohol into 20 mL of distilled water. The sol was obtained by the following method:
a. Double exchange reaction
*b. Solvent substitution
c. Reduction reaction
d. Hydrolysis reaction
e. Chemical condensation
2496. Sullfur sol was obtained by adding 5 mL of a solution of sulfur in alcohol into 20 mL of distilled water. The sol was obtained by the following method:
a. Hydrolysis reaction
b. Chemical condensation
c. Reduction reaction
*d. Solvent substitution
e. Double exchange reaction
2497. Suppositories are widely used in medicine. What requirement should their aggregative stability meet?
a. Must be non-volatile
b. Must be solid
c. Must not disintegrate
*d. Melting point of 37^oC
e. Must not dissolve
2498. Suppositories are widely used in medicine. What requirement should their aggregative stability meet?
a. Must be solid
*b. Melting point of 37^oC
c. Must be non-volatile
d. Must not disintegrate
e. Must not dissolve
2499. Suppositories are widely used in medicine. What requirement should their aggregative stability meet?
a. Must be solid
b. Must not disintegrate
c. Must not dissolve
*d. Melting point of 37^oC
e. Must be non-volatile
2500. Surfactants and high-molecular compounds are added into concentrated emulsions to stabilize them. These substances are:
*a. Emulsifiers
b. Activators
c. Absorbents
d. Catalysts
e. Solvents
2501. Surfactants and high-molecular compounds are added into concentrated emulsions to stabilize them. These substances are:
a. Activators
b. Catalysts
*c. Emulsifiers
d. Absorbents
e. Solvents
2502. Surfactants and high-molecular compounds are added into concentrated emulsions to stabilize them. These substances are:
a. Catalysts
*b. Emulsifiers
c. Absorbents
d. Solvents
e. Activators
2503. Symptoms of cardiac failure are detected during examination of a female patient. Specify the possible cause of myocardial failure among those named below:
a. Coarctation of aorta
b. Mitral stenosis
c. Primary hypertension
d. Pulmonary emphysema
*e. Infectious myocarditis
2504. Symptoms of cardiac failure are detected during examination of a female patient. Specify the possible cause of myocardial failure among those named below:
a. Mitral stenosis
b. Pulmonary emphysema
*c. Infectious myocarditis
d. Primary hypertension
e. Coarctation of aorta
2505. Symptoms of cardiac failure are detected during examination of a female patient. Specify the possible cause of myocardial failure among those named below:
a. Primary hypertension
b. Pulmonary emphysema
c. Coarctation of aorta
*d. Infectious myocarditis
e. Mitral stenosis
2506. Synthesis of a medicinal substance occurs in an isolated system. What is a direction criterion of spontaneous processes?
*a. Entropy change
b. Helmholtz energy
c. Gibbs energy
d. Intrinsic energy
e. Enthalpy
2507. Synthesis of a medicinal substance occurs in an isolated system. What is a direction criterion of spontaneous processes?
a. Enthalpy
b. Gibbs energy
*c. Entropy change
d. Intrinsic energy
e. Helmholtz energy
2508. Synthesis of a medicinal substance occurs in an isolated system. What is a direction criterion of spontaneous processes?
a. Intrinsic energy
b. Helmholtz energy
c. Gibbs energy
d. Enthalpy
*e. Entropy change
2509. Tests for agglutination and lysis of the Leptospira bacteria are used in microbiological diagnostics of leptospirosis. How should these tests be evaluated?
*a. With dark field method
b. Against dark background
c. With unaided eye
d. With agglutinoscope
e. With microscope set at low magnification
2510. Tests for agglutination and lysis of the Leptospira bacteria are used in microbiological diagnostics of leptospirosis. How should these tests be evaluated?
*a. With dark field method
b. With unaided eye
c. With agglutinoscope
d. Against dark background
e. With microscope set at low magnification
2511. Tests for agglutination and lysis of the Leptospira bacteria are used in microbiological diagnostics of leptospirosis. How should these tests be evaluated?
a. With agglutinoscope
b. Against dark background
c. With unaided eye
d. With microscope set at low magnification
*e. With dark field method
2512. The 55-year-old patient has been diagnosed with angina pectoris. Calcium channel-blocking agent was prescribed for treatment. Name this agent:
*a. Amlodipine
b. Atenolol
c. Reserpine
d. Guanethidine
e. Labetalol
2513. The 55-year-old patient has been diagnosed with angina pectoris. Calcium channel-blocking agent was prescribed for treatment. Name this agent:
*a. Amlodipine
b. Guanethidine
c. Atenolol
d. Reserpine
e. Labetalol
2514. The 55-year-old patient has been diagnosed with angina pectoris. Calcium channel-blocking agent was prescribed for treatment. Name this agent:
a. Guanethidine
b. Reserpine
c. Atenolol
d. Labetalol
*e. Amlodipine
2515. The Embryophyta subkingdom (higher plants) includes mainly terrestrial organisms, represented by various life forms (grasses, shrubs, subshrubs, trees, etc.). What division of higher plants includes only shrubs and trees?
*a. Pynophyta
b. Polypodiophyta
c. Magnoliophyta
d. Bryophyta
e. Lycopodiophyta
2516. The Embryophyta subkingdom (higher plants) includes mainly terrestrial organisms, represented by various life forms (grasses, shrubs, subshrubs, trees, etc.). What division of higher plants includes only shrubs and trees?
a. Magnoliophyta
b. Bryophyta
c. Polypodiophyta
*d. Pynophyta
e. Lycopodiophyta
2517. The Embryophyta subkingdom (higher plants) includes mainly terrestrial organisms, represented by various life forms (grasses, shrubs, subshrubs, trees, etc.). What division of higher plants includes only shrubs and trees?
a. Polypodiophyta
b. Magnoliophyta
c. Lycopodiophyta
d. Bryophyta
*e. Pynophyta
2518. The Fajans-Khodakov method is used to determine the mass fraction of sodium chloride (NaCl) in a drug. What indicator is used in this titration method?
a. Ammonium iron(III) sulfate
*b. Fluorescein
c. Potassium chromate
d. Phenolphthalein
e. Methyl red
2519. The Fajans-Khodakov method is used to determine the mass fraction of sodium chloride (NaCl) in a drug. What indicator is used in this titration method?
a. Methyl red
*b. Fluorescein
c. Potassium chromate
d. Ammonium iron(III) sulfate
e. Phenolphthalein
2520. The Fajans-Khodakov method is used to determine the mass fraction of sodium chloride (NaCl) in a drug. What indicator is used in this titration method?
a. Methyl red
b. Potassium chromate
*c. Fluorescein
d. Ammonium iron(III) sulfate
e. Phenolphthalein
2521. The State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine includes the method of determining molar mass of a polymer, which is based on the following property of high-molecular substances:
a. Light scattering
b. Saturated vapor pressure
c. Freezing point
*d. Viscosity
e. Osmotic pressure
2522. The State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine includes the method of determining molar mass of a polymer, which is based on the following property of high-molecular substances:
a. Osmotic pressure
b. Saturated vapor pressure
*c. Viscosity
d. Freezing point
e. Light scattering
2523. The State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine includes the method of determining molar mass of a polymer, which is based on the following property of high-molecular substances:
a. Saturated vapor pressure
b. Freezing point
c. Osmotic pressure
*d. Viscosity
e. Light scattering
2524. The Wasserman test was positive in a 25-year-old woman. What disease can be diagnosed using this test?
*a. Syphilis
b. Diphtheria
c. Brucellosis
d. Tuberculosis
e. Leptospirosis
2525. The Wasserman test was positive in a 25-year-old woman. What disease can be diagnosed using this test?
a. Brucellosis
*b. Syphilis
c. Tuberculosis
d. Diphtheria
e. Leptospirosis
2526. The Wasserman test was positive in a 25-year-old woman. What disease can be diagnosed using this test?
a. Tuberculosis
b. Diphtheria
c. Leptospirosis
d. Brucellosis
*e. Syphilis
2527. The absorption zone of the primary anatomical root cortex mainly consists of multi-layered, live, loose parenchyma with starch granules. What tissue is described above?
*a. Mesodermis
b. Periderm
c. Ectodermis
d. Endodermis
e. Hypodermis
2528. The absorption zone of the primary anatomical root cortex mainly consists of multi-layered, live, loose parenchyma with starch granules. What tissue is described above?
a. Endodermis
b. Hypodermis
c. Ectodermis
d. Periderm
*e. Mesodermis
2529. The absorption zone of the primary anatomical root cortex mainly consists of multi-layered, live, loose parenchyma with starch granules. What tissue is described above?
a. Periderm
b. Ectodermis
*c. Mesodermis
d. Hypodermis
e. Endodermis
2530. The anti-tumor preparation Methotrexate is a structural analogue of folic acid. The mechanism of its action is based on the inhibition of the following enzyme:
a. Hexokinase
*b. Dihydrofolate reductase
c. Lactate dehydrogenase
d. Creatine kinase
e. Xanthine oxidase
2531. The anti-tumor preparation Methotrexate is a structural analogue of folic acid. The mechanism of its action is based on the inhibition of the following enzyme:
a. Hexokinase
b. Creatine kinase
c. Xanthine oxidase
d. Lactate dehydrogenase
*e. Dihydrofolate reductase
2532. The anti-tumor preparation Methotrexate is a structural analogue of folic acid. The mechanism of its action is based on the inhibition of the following enzyme:
a. Hexokinase
b. Lactate dehydrogenase
*c. Dihydrofolate reductase
d. Xanthine oxidase
e. Creatine kinase
2533. The antitumor agent 5-fluorouracil blocks the enzyme that attaches the methyl group to deoxyuridine monophosphate (dUMP). What reaction becomes inhibited, when this medicine is used?
*a. Synthesis of thymidine monophosphate
b. Synthesis of glucose monophosphate
c. Synthesis of glycerol monophosphate
d. Synthesis of adenosine monophosphate
e. Synthesis of guanosine monophosphate
2534. The antitumor agent 5-fluorouracil blocks the enzyme that attaches the methyl group to deoxyuridine monophosphate (dUMP). What reaction becomes inhibited, when this medicine is used?
*a. Synthesis of thymidine monophosphate
b. Synthesis of glycerol monophosphate
c. Synthesis of guanosine monophosphate
d. Synthesis of glucose monophosphate
e. Synthesis of adenosine monophosphate
2535. The antitumor agent 5-fluorouracil blocks the enzyme that attaches the methyl group to deoxyuridine monophosphate (dUMP). What reaction becomes inhibited, when this medicine is used?
a. Synthesis of glucose monophosphate
*b. Synthesis of thymidine monophosphate
c. Synthesis of adenosine monophosphate
d. Synthesis of guanosine monophosphate
e. Synthesis of glycerol monophosphate
2536. The brain is higly dependent on its supply with oxygen and energy substrates. Under physiological conditions, neurons utilize the following as an energy substrate:
a. Bilirubin
*b. Glucose
c. Amino acids
d. Higher fatty acids
e. Cholesterol
2537. The brain is higly dependent on its supply with oxygen and energy substrates. Under physiological conditions, neurons utilize the following as an energy substrate:
a. Bilirubin
b. Cholesterol
*c. Glucose
d. Amino acids
e. Higher fatty acids
2538. The brain is higly dependent on its supply with oxygen and energy substrates. Under physiological conditions, neurons utilize the following as an energy substrate:
a. Cholesterol
b. Bilirubin
c. Amino acids
d. Higher fatty acids
*e. Glucose
2539. The breakdown of hemoglobin is accompanied by the formation of bile pigments. What pigment forms as a result of the heme oxidation reaction?
*a. Biliverdin
b. Carotene
c. Chlorophyll
d. Stercobilinogen
e. Urobilinogen
2540. The breakdown of hemoglobin is accompanied by the formation of bile pigments. What pigment forms as a result of the heme oxidation reaction?
a. Chlorophyll
b. Urobilinogen
*c. Biliverdin
d. Carotene
e. Stercobilinogen
2541. The breakdown of hemoglobin is accompanied by the formation of bile pigments. What pigment forms as a result of the heme oxidation reaction?
a. Urobilinogen
b. Carotene
c. Chlorophyll
*d. Biliverdin
e. Stercobilinogen
2542. The breakdown of starch in the body is a catalytic process that occurs with the help of amylase. What type of catalysis is it?
*a. Enzymatic catalysis
b. Autocatalysis
c. Redox catalysis
d. Acid-base catalysis
e. Heterogeneous catalysis
2543. The breakdown of starch in the body is a catalytic process that occurs with the help of amylase. What type of catalysis is it?
a. Acid-base catalysis
*b. Enzymatic catalysis
c. Autocatalysis
d. Heterogeneous catalysis
e. Redox catalysis
2544. The breakdown of starch in the body is a catalytic process that occurs with the help of amylase. What type of catalysis is it?
a. Redox catalysis
b. Heterogeneous catalysis
*c. Enzymatic catalysis
d. Acid-base catalysis
e. Autocatalysis
2545. The cells of Brassica oleracea leaves contain a certain vitamin that facilitates healing of gastric and duodenal ulcers. It is vitamin:
a. A
*b. U
c. E
d. C
e. K
2546. The cells of Brassica oleracea leaves contain a certain vitamin that facilitates healing of gastric and duodenal ulcers. It is vitamin:
a. A
*b. U
c. K
d. C
e. E
2547. The cells of Brassica oleracea leaves contain a certain vitamin that facilitates healing of gastric and duodenal ulcers. It is vitamin:
a. E
*b. U
c. K
d. A
e. C
2548. The children attending a kindergarten were hospitalized with diagnosis of poliomyelitis. What was the route of infection transmission in this case?
*a. Fecal-oral transmission
b. Direct contact transmission
c. Alimentary transmission
d. Vector-borne transmission
e. Transmission via airborne dust particles
2549. The children attending a kindergarten were hospitalized with diagnosis of poliomyelitis. What was the route of infection transmission in this case?
a. Direct contact transmission
b. Alimentary transmission
c. Vector-borne transmission
d. Transmission via airborne dust particles
*e. Fecal-oral transmission
2550. The children attending a kindergarten were hospitalized with diagnosis of poliomyelitis. What was the route of infection transmission in this case?
a. Transmission via airborne dust particles
b. Vector-borne transmission
*c. Fecal-oral transmission
d. Direct contact transmission
e. Alimentary transmission
2551. The defensive mechanisms against some infectious diseases can be greatly reinforced with interferon. Interferon preparations will be the most advisable in cases of the following type of infections:
*a. Viral
b. Helminthic
c. Fungal
d. Protozoal
e. Microbioses
2552. The defensive mechanisms against some infectious diseases can be greatly reinforced with interferon. Interferon preparations will be the most advisable in cases of the following type of infections:
*a. Viral
b. Protozoal
c. Microbioses
d. Fungal
e. Helminthic
2553. The defensive mechanisms against some infectious diseases can be greatly reinforced with interferon. Interferon preparations will be the most advisable in cases of the following type of infections:
a. Microbioses
b. Fungal
c. Protozoal
d. Helminthic
*e. Viral
2554. The end product of starch hydrolysis is:
*a. D-glucose
b. Maltose
c. D-fructose
d. Saccharose
e. D-galactose
2555. The end product of starch hydrolysis is:
a. Maltose
b. D-fructose
c. D-galactose
d. Saccharose
*e. D-glucose
2556. The end product of starch hydrolysis is:
a. Saccharose
b. D-galactose
c. D-fructose
*d. D-glucose
e. Maltose
2557. The enzymes of medicinal substance metabolism that require monooxygenase reactions of biotransformation are localized in the cells mainly in the:
a. Cytosol
b. Lysosomes
*c. Microsomes of the endoplasmic reticulum
d. Mitochondria
e. Nucleus
2558. The enzymes of medicinal substance metabolism that require monooxygenase reactions of biotransformation are localized in the cells mainly in the:
a. Cytosol
b. Nucleus
c. Mitochondria
*d. Microsomes of the endoplasmic reticulum
e. Lysosomes
2559. The enzymes of medicinal substance metabolism that require monooxygenase reactions of biotransformation are localized in the cells mainly in the:
a. Mitochondria
*b. Microsomes of the endoplasmic reticulum
c. Cytosol
d. Nucleus
e. Lysosomes
2560. The following belongs to high-concentration suspensions:
*a. Pastes
b. Ointments
c. Powders
d. Foams
e. Creams
2561. The following belongs to high-concentration suspensions:
*a. Pastes
b. Powders
c. Foams
d. Ointments
e. Creams
2562. The following belongs to high-concentration suspensions:
a. Foams
*b. Pastes
c. Creams
d. Powders
e. Ointments
2563. The following have been detected in hand lavage of the kindergarten chef: colibacilli, ray fungi, staphylococci, bacilli, mold fungi. What microbes are evidential of fecal contamination of hands?
a. Mold fungi
b. Ray fungi
c. Bacilli
d. Staphylococci
*e. Colibacilli
2564. The following have been detected in hand lavage of the kindergarten chef: colibacilli, ray fungi, staphylococci, bacilli, mold fungi. What microbes are evidential of fecal contamination of hands?
a. Ray fungi
b. Bacilli
*c. Colibacilli
d. Mold fungi
e. Staphylococci
2565. The following have been detected in hand lavage of the kindergarten chef: colibacilli, ray fungi, staphylococci, bacilli, mold fungi. What microbes are evidential of fecal contamination of hands?
a. Ray fungi
b. Mold fungi
c. Staphylococci
d. Bacilli
*e. Colibacilli
2566. The following ion has the highest coagulation ability for iron hydroxide sol with positively charged granules:
a. Calcium
b. Chloride
c. Sodium
*d. Sulfate
e. Nitrate
2567. The following ion has the highest coagulation ability for iron hydroxide sol with positively charged granules:
a. Chloride
b. Calcium
c. Sodium
d. Nitrate
*e. Sulfate
2568. The following ion has the highest coagulation ability for iron hydroxide sol with positively charged granules:
a. Nitrate
b. Calcium
c. Chloride
*d. Sulfate
e. Sodium
2569. The following is used to determine the titrant volume in the process of titrimetric analysis:
*a. Burettes
b. Measuring tubes
c. Measuring flasks
d. Cylinders
e. Measuring glasses
2570. The following is used to determine the titrant volume in the process of titrimetric analysis:
a. Measuring flasks
b. Cylinders
c. Measuring glasses
d. Measuring tubes
*e. Burettes
2571. The following method can be used to quantitatively determine magnesium sulfate in the solution:
a. Argentometry
*b. Complexometric titration
c. Thiocyanate titration
d. Nitrite titration
e. Acidimetry
2572. The following method can be used to quantitatively determine magnesium sulfate in the solution:
a. Nitrite titration
b. Argentometry
c. Thiocyanate titration
d. Acidimetry
*e. Complexometric titration
2573. The following method can be used to quantitatively determine magnesium sulfate in the solution:
a. Thiocyanate titration
b. Nitrite titration
c. Acidimetry
d. Argentometry
*e. Complexometric titration
2574. The fruit is a spiky spherical green capsule. The capsule splits open into two valves and contains usually one large glossy dark brown seed with a matt whitish scar. It is a fruit of:
a. Hipericum perforatum
b. Datura stramonium
*c. Aesculus hippocastanum
d. Plantago major
e. Papaver somniferum
2575. The fruit is a spiky spherical green capsule. The capsule splits open into two valves and contains usually one large glossy dark brown seed with a matt whitish scar. It is a fruit of:
a. Papaver somniferum
b. Datura stramonium
c. Hipericum perforatum
*d. Aesculus hippocastanum
e. Plantago major
2576. The fruit is a spiky spherical green capsule. The capsule splits open into two valves and contains usually one large glossy dark brown seed with a matt whitish scar. It is a fruit of:
a. Plantago major
b. Papaver somniferum
c. Hipericum perforatum
*d. Aesculus hippocastanum
e. Datura stramonium
2577. The gradual aging of the body is accompanied by the slowing down of metabolic processes, the appearance of wrinkles, and the literal desiccation of a human body, associated with the cells in muscles and skin losing a certain ability that they have. Name this ability of the cells.
a. Adhesion
b. Moistening
c. Wetting
d. Cohesion
*e. Swelling
2578. The gradual aging of the body is accompanied by the slowing down of metabolic processes, the appearance of wrinkles, and the literal desiccation of a human body, associated with the cells in muscles and skin losing a certain ability that they have. Name this ability of the cells.
a. Adhesion
b. Wetting
*c. Swelling
d. Cohesion
e. Moistening
2579. The gradual aging of the body is accompanied by the slowing down of metabolic processes, the appearance of wrinkles, and the literal desiccation of a human body, associated with the cells in muscles and skin losing a certain ability that they have. Name this ability of the cells.
a. Moistening
b. Adhesion
c. Cohesion
*d. Swelling
e. Wetting
2580. The inflorescence of a plant has an elongated main axis and sessile flowers. What type of inflorescence is it?
a. Corymb
b. Round capitulum
*c. Spike
d. Umbel
e. Flat capitulum
2581. The inflorescence of a plant has an elongated main axis and sessile flowers. What type of inflorescence is it?
a. Flat capitulum
b. Round capitulum
c. Corymb
d. Umbel
*e. Spike
2582. The inflorescence of a plant has an elongated main axis and sessile flowers. What type of inflorescence is it?
a. Umbel
b. Flat capitulum
*c. Spike
d. Corymb
e. Round capitulum
2583. The isoelectric point of a protein is 5.7. At what pH value does the protein macroion move to the anode?
a. 4.0
b. 4.7
c. 5.7
*d. 7.0
e. 5.0
2584. The isoelectric point of a protein is 5.7. At what pH value does the protein macroion move to the anode?
a. 5.0
b. 4.7
c. 5.7
d. 4.0
*e. 7.0
2585. The isoelectric point of a protein is 5.7. At what pH value does the protein macroion move to the anode?
a. 5.7
b. 4.7
c. 4.0
*d. 7.0
e. 5.0
2586. The leaves of a Lamiaceae family plant are ovate, with a pointed tip, crenate leaf edge, and a lemon scent, which is characteristic of the following plant:
a. Lamium album
*b. Melissa officinalis
c. Leonurus cardiacа
d. Mentha piperita
e. Salvia officinalis
2587. The leaves of a Lamiaceae family plant are ovate, with a pointed tip, crenate leaf edge, and a lemon scent, which is characteristic of the following plant:
a. Mentha piperita
*b. Melissa officinalis
c. Salvia officinalis
d. Leonurus cardiacа
e. Lamium album
2588. The leaves of a Lamiaceae family plant are ovate, with a pointed tip, crenate leaf edge, and a lemon scent, which is characteristic of the following plant:
a. Salvia officinalis
b. Mentha piperita
c. Lamium album
d. Leonurus cardiacа
*e. Melissa officinalis
2589. The material obtained from a patient with suspected acute Salmonella-induced gastroenteritis was sent to a bacteriological laboratory. What should be used in this case for serological identification of the isolated pure bacterial culture?
*a. Agglutinating diagnostic serum for salmonellosis
b. Live pure culture of Salmonella
c. Salmonellosis diagnosticum
d. Erythrocytic salmonellosis diagnosticum
e. Patient's blood serum
2590. The material obtained from a patient with suspected acute Salmonella-induced gastroenteritis was sent to a bacteriological laboratory. What should be used in this case for serological identification of the isolated pure bacterial culture?
*a. Agglutinating diagnostic serum for salmonellosis
b. Salmonellosis diagnosticum
c. Erythrocytic salmonellosis diagnosticum
d. Patient's blood serum
e. Live pure culture of Salmonella
2591. The material obtained from a patient with suspected acute Salmonella-induced gastroenteritis was sent to a bacteriological laboratory. What should be used in this case for serological identification of the isolated pure bacterial culture?
a. Live pure culture of Salmonella
b. Erythrocytic salmonellosis diagnosticum
c. Salmonellosis diagnosticum
*d. Agglutinating diagnostic serum for salmonellosis
e. Patient's blood serum
2592. The method consisting of removal of low-molecular impurities from colloidal systems and high-molecular compound solutions by means of diffusion through semipermeable membrane is called:
a. Compensatory dialysis
*b. Dialysis
c. Ultrafiltration
d. Decantation
e. Electrodialysis
2593. The method consisting of removal of low-molecular impurities from colloidal systems and high-molecular compound solutions by means of diffusion through semipermeable membrane is called:
a. Compensatory dialysis
b. Ultrafiltration
c. Electrodialysis
d. Decantation
*e. Dialysis
2594. The method consisting of removal of low-molecular impurities from colloidal systems and high-molecular compound solutions by means of diffusion through semipermeable membrane is called:
a. Electrodialysis
b. Decantation
*c. Dialysis
d. Ultrafiltration
e. Compensatory dialysis
2595. The mixture being studied contains Mg^2+, Ni^2+, Hg^2+ cations. What reagent allows to detect Ni^2+ cations in the mixtire?
a. 1-Nitroso-2-naphthol
*b. Dimethylglyoxime
c. Magneson I (Azo violet)
d. Ammonia solution
e. Alizarin
2596. The mixture being studied contains Mg^2+, Ni^2+, Hg^2+ cations. What reagent allows to detect Ni^2+ cations in the mixtire?
a. 1-Nitroso-2-naphthol
b. Ammonia solution
c. Magneson I (Azo violet)
*d. Dimethylglyoxime
e. Alizarin
2597. The mixture being studied contains Mg^2+, Ni^2+, Hg^2+ cations. What reagent allows to detect Ni^2+ cations in the mixtire?
a. Alizarin
b. Magneson I (Azo violet)
*c. Dimethylglyoxime
d. Ammonia solution
e. 1-Nitroso-2-naphthol
2598. The mother of a 3-year-old child was taking antibiotics during her pregnancy. The child presents with destruction of the incisors and a brown border on the gums. What antibiotic has caused this side effect?
a. Ciprofloxacin
b. Levomycetin (Chloramphenicol)
*c. Doxycycline hydrochloride
d. Co-amoxiclav
e. Azithromycin
2599. The mother of a 3-year-old child was taking antibiotics during her pregnancy. The child presents with destruction of the incisors and a brown border on the gums. What antibiotic has caused this side effect?
a. Co-amoxiclav
b. Azithromycin
c. Ciprofloxacin
*d. Doxycycline hydrochloride
e. Levomycetin (Chloramphenicol)
2600. The mother of a 3-year-old child was taking antibiotics during her pregnancy. The child presents with destruction of the incisors and a brown border on the gums. What antibiotic has caused this side effect?
a. Levomycetin (Chloramphenicol)
b. Ciprofloxacin
c. Co-amoxiclav
d. Azithromycin
*e. Doxycycline hydrochloride
2601. The ornithine cycle is the main way of ammonia neutralization in the human body. What substance is the end product of ammonia neutralization?
*a. Urea
b. Arginine
c. Citrulline
d. Carbamoyl phosphate
e. Uric acid
2602. The ornithine cycle is the main way of ammonia neutralization in the human body. What substance is the end product of ammonia neutralization?
*a. Urea
b. Carbamoyl phosphate
c. Citrulline
d. Arginine
e. Uric acid
2603. The ornithine cycle is the main way of ammonia neutralization in the human body. What substance is the end product of ammonia neutralization?
a. Carbamoyl phosphate
b. Citrulline
*c. Urea
d. Arginine
e. Uric acid
2604. The patient has icteric skin; unconjugated bilirubin content in blood is high; conjugated bilirubin in urine is not detected. There is significant amount of urobilin in urine and stercobilin in feces. Name the pathology characterized by the given symptoms:
*a. Hemolytic jaundice
b. Hepatocellular jaundice
c. Jaundice of the newborn
d. Obstructive jaundice
e. Atherosclerosis
2605. The patient has icteric skin; unconjugated bilirubin content in blood is high; conjugated bilirubin in urine is not detected. There is significant amount of urobilin in urine and stercobilin in feces. Name the pathology characterized by the given symptoms:
a. Atherosclerosis
b. Obstructive jaundice
*c. Hemolytic jaundice
d. Hepatocellular jaundice
e. Jaundice of the newborn
2606. The patient has icteric skin; unconjugated bilirubin content in blood is high; conjugated bilirubin in urine is not detected. There is significant amount of urobilin in urine and stercobilin in feces. Name the pathology characterized by the given symptoms:
a. Obstructive jaundice
b. Atherosclerosis
c. Jaundice of the newborn
d. Hepatocellular jaundice
*e. Hemolytic jaundice
2607. The patient with alcoholic cirrhosis complains of general weakness and dyspnea. The following is revealed: decrease of arterial pressure, ascites, dilation of stomach anterior wall superficial veins, esophageal varicose veins dilatation, splenomegaly. What haemodynamics disorder does the patient suffer from?
*a. Portal hypertension
b. Cardiac insufficiency
c. Right ventricular failure
d. Collapse
e. Left ventricular failure
2608. The patient with alcoholic cirrhosis complains of general weakness and dyspnea. The following is revealed: decrease of arterial pressure, ascites, dilation of stomach anterior wall superficial veins, esophageal varicose veins dilatation, splenomegaly. What haemodynamics disorder does the patient suffer from?
a. Cardiac insufficiency
b. Collapse
*c. Portal hypertension
d. Right ventricular failure
e. Left ventricular failure
2609. The patient with alcoholic cirrhosis complains of general weakness and dyspnea. The following is revealed: decrease of arterial pressure, ascites, dilation of stomach anterior wall superficial veins, esophageal varicose veins dilatation, splenomegaly. What haemodynamics disorder does the patient suffer from?
a. Right ventricular failure
b. Collapse
*c. Portal hypertension
d. Cardiac insufficiency
e. Left ventricular failure
2610. The patient with parkinsonism has been prescribed a drug - dopamine precursor - to relieve muscular rigidity. Name this drug:
a. Aminazine
b. Scopolamine hydrobromide
c. Atropine sulphate
d. Paracetamol
*e. Levodopa
2611. The patient with parkinsonism has been prescribed a drug - dopamine precursor - to relieve muscular rigidity. Name this drug:
a. Atropine sulphate
*b. Levodopa
c. Paracetamol
d. Aminazine
e. Scopolamine hydrobromide
2612. The patient with parkinsonism has been prescribed a drug - dopamine precursor - to relieve muscular rigidity. Name this drug:
a. Paracetamol
b. Scopolamine hydrobromide
c. Aminazine
*d. Levodopa
e. Atropine sulphate
2613. The patient's 24-hour urine output is 6 liters, its specific gravity varies from 1003 to 1008 g/L. What pathological process can be characterized by these signs?
*a. Diabetes insipidus
b. Acute renal failure
c. Diabetes mellitus
d. Chronic renal failure
e. Hypothyroidism
2614. The patient's 24-hour urine output is 6 liters, its specific gravity varies from 1003 to 1008 g/L. What pathological process can be characterized by these signs?
*a. Diabetes insipidus
b. Acute renal failure
c. Hypothyroidism
d. Chronic renal failure
e. Diabetes mellitus
2615. The patient's 24-hour urine output is 6 liters, its specific gravity varies from 1003 to 1008 g/L. What pathological process can be characterized by these signs?
*a. Diabetes insipidus
b. Hypothyroidism
c. Acute renal failure
d. Diabetes mellitus
e. Chronic renal failure
2616. The patient's diuresis decreased to 800 mL per 24 hours. Such change in urine output is called:
a. Polyuria
b. Anuria
*c. Oliguria
d. Proteinuria
e. Leukocyturia
2617. The patient's diuresis decreased to 800 mL per 24 hours. Such change in urine output is called:
a. Polyuria
b. Anuria
c. Leukocyturia
*d. Oliguria
e. Proteinuria
2618. The patient's diuresis decreased to 800 mL per 24 hours. Such change in urine output is called:
a. Proteinuria
b. Leukocyturia
*c. Oliguria
d. Polyuria
e. Anuria
2619. The pharmacological effect of some antidepressants is associated with detoxification of biogenic amines in the brain. What enzyme inactivates biogenic amines?
*a. Monoamine oxidase
b. Deaminase
c. Transaminase
d. Decarboxylase
e. Lactate dehydrogenase
2620. The pharmacological effect of some antidepressants is associated with detoxification of biogenic amines in the brain. What enzyme inactivates biogenic amines?
*a. Monoamine oxidase
b. Lactate dehydrogenase
c. Deaminase
d. Transaminase
e. Decarboxylase
2621. The pharmacological effect of some antidepressants is associated with detoxification of biogenic amines in the brain. What enzyme inactivates biogenic amines?
a. Transaminase
b. Deaminase
c. Lactate dehydrogenase
d. Decarboxylase
*e. Monoamine oxidase
2622. The pharmacopoeial method of determining the purity of antibiotics, vitamins, etc. requires studying the movement of the dispersed phase particles in a stationary dispersion medium under the effect of a difference in potentials. Name this phenomenon.
a. Electroosmosis
b. Sedimentation potential
c. Brownian motion
d. Streaming potential
*e. Electrophoresis
2623. The pharmacopoeial method of determining the purity of antibiotics, vitamins, etc. requires studying the movement of the dispersed phase particles in a stationary dispersion medium under the effect of a difference in potentials. Name this phenomenon.
a. Streaming potential
b. Brownian motion
c. Sedimentation potential
*d. Electrophoresis
e. Electroosmosis
2624. The pharmacopoeial method of determining the purity of antibiotics, vitamins, etc. requires studying the movement of the dispersed phase particles in a stationary dispersion medium under the effect of a difference in potentials. Name this phenomenon.
a. Streaming potential
b. Sedimentation potential
c. Electroosmosis
*d. Electrophoresis
e. Brownian motion
2625. The pharmacy of a tuberculosis clinic has received tuberculin. What is the purpose of this substance?
a. Phagotyping of mycobacteria
b. Specific prevention of tuberculosis
*c. Allergic diagnostics of tuberculosis
d. Specific therapy of tuberculosis
e. Serological diagnostics of tuberculosis
2626. The pharmacy of a tuberculosis clinic has received tuberculin. What is the purpose of this substance?
a. Specific prevention of tuberculosis
b. Phagotyping of mycobacteria
c. Specific therapy of tuberculosis
d. Serological diagnostics of tuberculosis
*e. Allergic diagnostics of tuberculosis
2627. The pharmacy of a tuberculosis clinic has received tuberculin. What is the purpose of this substance?
a. Specific therapy of tuberculosis
b. Specific prevention of tuberculosis
c. Phagotyping of mycobacteria
*d. Allergic diagnostics of tuberculosis
e. Serological diagnostics of tuberculosis
2628. The population is being vaccinated for specific disease prevention. What type of immunity is developed as the result of this vaccination?
*a. Artificially acquired active
b. Naturally acquired active
c. -
d. Naturally acquired passive
e. Artificially acquired passive
2629. The population is being vaccinated for specific disease prevention. What type of immunity is developed as the result of this vaccination?
a. -
b. Artificially acquired passive
c. Naturally acquired passive
*d. Artificially acquired active
e. Naturally acquired active
2630. The population is being vaccinated for specific disease prevention. What type of immunity is developed as the result of this vaccination?
a. Naturally acquired passive
b. Naturally acquired active
c. Artificially acquired passive
d. -
*e. Artificially acquired active
2631. The presence of storage proteins in a microslide prepared from Phaseolus vulgaris endosperm can be confirmed, if the microslide colors golden-yellow when stained with Lugol solution. In plant seeds, such protein deposits are called:
a. Inulin
b. Starch grains
c. Chlorophyll grains
*d. Aleurone grains
e. Glycogen
2632. The presence of storage proteins in a microslide prepared from Phaseolus vulgaris endosperm can be confirmed, if the microslide colors golden-yellow when stained with Lugol solution. In plant seeds, such protein deposits are called:
a. Inulin
b. Starch grains
c. Glycogen
d. Chlorophyll grains
*e. Aleurone grains
2633. The presence of storage proteins in a microslide prepared from Phaseolus vulgaris endosperm can be confirmed, if the microslide colors golden-yellow when stained with Lugol solution. In plant seeds, such protein deposits are called:
a. Starch grains
b. Glycogen
*c. Aleurone grains
d. Chlorophyll grains
e. Inulin
2634. The process of glycolysis starts with irreversible reaction of glucose transforming into glucose 6-phosphate. What enzyme catalyzes this reaction?
a. Aldolase
b. Creatine kinase
*c. Hexokinase
d. Lipase
e. Catalase
2635. The process of glycolysis starts with irreversible reaction of glucose transforming into glucose 6-phosphate. What enzyme catalyzes this reaction?
a. Catalase
b. Creatine kinase
c. Lipase
*d. Hexokinase
e. Aldolase
2636. The process of glycolysis starts with irreversible reaction of glucose transforming into glucose 6-phosphate. What enzyme catalyzes this reaction?
a. Creatine kinase
b. Lipase
c. Catalase
d. Aldolase
*e. Hexokinase
2637. The process of putrefaction is a component of physicochemical changes that occur with food proteins in the human gastrointestinal tract. What product is excreted with the urine and is an indicator of the intensity of the protein putrefaction in the large intestine?
a. Ammonia
b. Benzene
*c. Indican
d. Bilirubin
e. Cholesterol
2638. The process of putrefaction is a component of physicochemical changes that occur with food proteins in the human gastrointestinal tract. What product is excreted with the urine and is an indicator of the intensity of the protein putrefaction in the large intestine?
a. Ammonia
b. Benzene
*c. Indican
d. Cholesterol
e. Bilirubin
2639. The process of putrefaction is a component of physicochemical changes that occur with food proteins in the human gastrointestinal tract. What product is excreted with the urine and is an indicator of the intensity of the protein putrefaction in the large intestine?
a. Cholesterol
b. Ammonia
c. Benzene
*d. Indican
e. Bilirubin
2640. The products of condensation of aldehydes with hydroxylamine belong to the following class:
a. Hemiacetals
b. Ketoximes
c. Hydrazones
d. Hydrazides
*e. Aldoximes
2641. The products of condensation of aldehydes with hydroxylamine belong to the following class:
a. Hydrazones
*b. Aldoximes
c. Ketoximes
d. Hemiacetals
e. Hydrazides
2642. The products of condensation of aldehydes with hydroxylamine belong to the following class:
a. Hydrazones
b. Hemiacetals
*c. Aldoximes
d. Ketoximes
e. Hydrazides
2643. The prosess of one substance drawing the other in only with its surface is called:
*a. Adsorption
b. Chemisorption
c. Coagulation
d. Desorption
e. Absorption
2644. The prosess of one substance drawing the other in only with its surface is called:
a. Coagulation
b. Desorption
c. Absorption
d. Chemisorption
*e. Adsorption
2645. The prosess of one substance drawing the other in only with its surface is called:
a. Coagulation
b. Desorption
c. Chemisorption
*d. Adsorption
e. Absorption
2646. The second stage of detoxification involves joining certain chemical compounds with functional groups of toxines. Select one such compound:
*a. Glucuronic acid
b. Glucose
c. Higher fatty acids
d. Cholesterol
e. Pyruvate
2647. The second stage of detoxification involves joining certain chemical compounds with functional groups of toxines. Select one such compound:
a. Cholesterol
*b. Glucuronic acid
c. Pyruvate
d. Glucose
e. Higher fatty acids
2648. The second stage of detoxification involves joining certain chemical compounds with functional groups of toxines. Select one such compound:
a. Cholesterol
b. Higher fatty acids
c. Pyruvate
d. Glucose
*e. Glucuronic acid
2649. The secondary structure of eukaryotic DNA is a double helix. What bonds keep the strands of DNA molecule together?
*a. Hydrogen
b. Ester
c. Disulfide
d. Glycosidic
e. Peptide
2650. The secondary structure of eukaryotic DNA is a double helix. What bonds keep the strands of DNA molecule together?
*a. Hydrogen
b. Glycosidic
c. Peptide
d. Disulfide
e. Ester
2651. The secondary structure of eukaryotic DNA is a double helix. What bonds keep the strands of DNA molecule together?
a. Peptide
b. Disulfide
*c. Hydrogen
d. Ester
e. Glycosidic
2652. The stem surface of a woody plant is being studied. It is noted that the cells are parenchymal, dead, with suberized membranes. Therefore, this is:
*a. Cork
b. Phelloderm
c. Phellogen
d. Sclerenchyma fibers
e. Vessels
2653. The stem surface of a woody plant is being studied. It is noted that the cells are parenchymal, dead, with suberized membranes. Therefore, this is:
a. Sclerenchyma fibers
*b. Cork
c. Phelloderm
d. Phellogen
e. Vessels
2654. The stem surface of a woody plant is being studied. It is noted that the cells are parenchymal, dead, with suberized membranes. Therefore, this is:
a. Vessels
*b. Cork
c. Sclerenchyma fibers
d. Phelloderm
e. Phellogen
2655. The structure of the bacterial cell that provides microbes with increased resistance to the environmental factors and can remain intact for a long time can be detected by staining a smear according to the Ozheshkо technique. What is this structure called?
*a. Spore
b. Flagella
c. Pilus
d. Plasmid
e. Capsule
2656. The structure of the bacterial cell that provides microbes with increased resistance to the environmental factors and can remain intact for a long time can be detected by staining a smear according to the Ozheshkо technique. What is this structure called?
a. Flagella
b. Plasmid
c. Pilus
d. Capsule
*e. Spore
2657. The structure of the bacterial cell that provides microbes with increased resistance to the environmental factors and can remain intact for a long time can be detected by staining a smear according to the Ozheshkо technique. What is this structure called?
a. Pilus
b. Capsule
*c. Spore
d. Flagella
e. Plasmid
2658. The study of home-made canned vegetables revealed growth of microorganisms with the shape that resembled a tennis racket after inoculation on the Kitt-Tarozzi medium. What disease can be caused by these pathogens?
*a. Botulism
b. Cholera
c. Salmonellosis
d. Shigellosis
e. Escherichiosis
2659. The study of home-made canned vegetables revealed growth of microorganisms with the shape that resembled a tennis racket after inoculation on the Kitt-Tarozzi medium. What disease can be caused by these pathogens?
a. Cholera
b. Salmonellosis
*c. Botulism
d. Shigellosis
e. Escherichiosis
2660. The study of home-made canned vegetables revealed growth of microorganisms with the shape that resembled a tennis racket after inoculation on the Kitt-Tarozzi medium. What disease can be caused by these pathogens?
a. Salmonellosis
b. Shigellosis
c. Cholera
d. Escherichiosis
*e. Botulism
2661. The study of the main root ontogenesis shows that it has developed from:
a. Lateral meristem
*b. Radicle
c. Intercalary meristem
d. Pericycle
e. Apical meristem
2662. The study of the main root ontogenesis shows that it has developed from:
a. Lateral meristem
b. Pericycle
c. Intercalary meristem
*d. Radicle
e. Apical meristem
2663. The study of the main root ontogenesis shows that it has developed from:
a. Pericycle
b. Apical meristem
c. Intercalary meristem
d. Lateral meristem
*e. Radicle
2664. The surface activity of diphilic molecules can be described using the Traube-Duclos rule. How will the surface activity of fatty acids change in the area of low concentrations, if the length of the hydrocarbon radical increases by three –СН_2- groups?
a. It will become 27 times lower
b. It will become 9 times higher
*c. It will become 27 times higher
d. It will become 3 times lower
e. It will remain unchanged
2665. The surface activity of diphilic molecules can be described using the Traube-Duclos rule. How will the surface activity of fatty acids change in the area of low concentrations, if the length of the hydrocarbon radical increases by three –СН_2- groups?
a. It will become 9 times higher
b. It will become 3 times lower
*c. It will become 27 times higher
d. It will become 27 times lower
e. It will remain unchanged
2666. The surface activity of diphilic molecules can be described using the Traube-Duclos rule. How will the surface activity of fatty acids change in the area of low concentrations, if the length of the hydrocarbon radical increases by three –СН_2- groups?
a. It will remain unchanged
b. It will become 3 times lower
*c. It will become 27 times higher
d. It will become 9 times higher
e. It will become 27 times lower
2667. The synthesis of thyroid hormones is carried out from tyrosine within a special protein of the thyroid gland. Name this protein.
a. Albumin
b. Histone
c. Immunoglobulin
*d. Thyroglobulin
e. Interferon
2668. The synthesis of thyroid hormones is carried out from tyrosine within a special protein of the thyroid gland. Name this protein.
a. Albumin
b. Interferon
c. Immunoglobulin
*d. Thyroglobulin
e. Histone
2669. The synthesis of thyroid hormones is carried out from tyrosine within a special protein of the thyroid gland. Name this protein.
a. Histone
b. Albumin
*c. Thyroglobulin
d. Immunoglobulin
e. Interferon
2670. The technology of drug production widely uses the phenomena of absorption and ion exchange. Which of the ions will be selectively adsorbed on the surface of a silver chloride crystal from an aqueous solution?
a. Cu^2+
b. NO_3^-
c. H^+
d. OH^-
*e. Ag^+
2671. The technology of drug production widely uses the phenomena of absorption and ion exchange. Which of the ions will be selectively adsorbed on the surface of a silver chloride crystal from an aqueous solution?
a. Cu^2+
b. OH^-
c. NO_3^-
d. H^+
*e. Ag^+
2672. The technology of drug production widely uses the phenomena of absorption and ion exchange. Which of the ions will be selectively adsorbed on the surface of a silver chloride crystal from an aqueous solution?
a. H^+
b. NO_3^-
*c. Ag^+
d. Cu^2+
e. OH^-
2673. The third analitycal group of cations (acid-base classification) includes  Ca^2+, Sr^2+, Ba^2+. What acid can function as a precipitator agent (group reagent) for these cations?
*a. H_2SO_4
b. HCIO_4
c. HNO_3
d. CH_3COOH
e. HCI
2674. The third analitycal group of cations (acid-base classification) includes  Ca^2+, Sr^2+, Ba^2+. What acid can function as a precipitator agent (group reagent) for these cations?
a. CH_3COOH
b. HNO_3
c. HCI
*d. H_2SO_4
e. HCIO_4
2675. The third analitycal group of cations (acid-base classification) includes  Ca^2+, Sr^2+, Ba^2+. What acid can function as a precipitator agent (group reagent) for these cations?
a. HCIO_4
b. CH_3COOH
*c. H_2SO_4
d. HCI
e. HNO_3
2676. The titrant of mercurimetry method is:
a. 0,1mol solution of KSCN
b. 0,1mol solution of NH_4SCN
c. 0,1mol solution of AgNO_3
*d. 0,1mol solution of Hg_2(NO_3)_2
e. 0,1mol solution of NaNO_2
2677. The titrant of mercurimetry method is:
a. 0,1mol solution of NaNO_2
*b. 0,1mol solution of Hg_2(NO_3)_2
c. 0,1mol solution of NH_4SCN
d. 0,1mol solution of KSCN
e. 0,1mol solution of AgNO_3
2678. The titrant of mercurimetry method is:
a. 0,1mol solution of NaNO_2
b. 0,1mol solution of AgNO_3
*c. 0,1mol solution of Hg_2(NO_3)_2
d. 0,1mol solution of KSCN
e. 0,1mol solution of NH_4SCN
2679. There are plants selected, that have tubular, ligulate, pseudoligulate and funnelform flowers, clustered in simple flowerheads. These plants belong to the following family:
a. Solanaceae
b. Valerianaceae
c. Tiliaceae
*d. Asteraceae (Compositae)
e. Ericaceae
2680. There are plants selected, that have tubular, ligulate, pseudoligulate and funnelform flowers, clustered in simple flowerheads. These plants belong to the following family:
a. Tiliaceae
*b. Asteraceae (Compositae)
c. Ericaceae
d. Valerianaceae
e. Solanaceae
2681. Thermolabile medicinal preparation for extemporal use was heated to 65^oC thrice with intervals of one day between the heatings. What method of sterilization was used in this case?
*a. Tyndallization
b. Filtration
c. Koch's steam sterilization
d. Pasteurization
e. Calcination
2682. Thermolabile medicinal preparation for extemporal use was heated to 65^oC thrice with intervals of one day between the heatings. What method of sterilization was used in this case?
*a. Tyndallization
b. Koch's steam sterilization
c. Pasteurization
d. Filtration
e. Calcination
2683. Thermolabile medicinal preparation for extemporal use was heated to 65^oC thrice with intervals of one day between the heatings. What method of sterilization was used in this case?
a. Pasteurization
b. Calcination
c. Filtration
d. Koch's steam sterilization
*e. Tyndallization
2684. Thiocyanatometric titration method requires secondary standard solution of potassium thiocyanate that is standardized with standard solution of:
a. Copper(II) nitrate
b. Sulfuric acid
c. Hydrochloric acid
d. Iron(II) sulfate
*e. Silver nitrate
2685. Thiocyanatometric titration method requires secondary standard solution of potassium thiocyanate that is standardized with standard solution of:
a. Iron(II) sulfate
b. Hydrochloric acid
c. Copper(II) nitrate
*d. Silver nitrate
e. Sulfuric acid
2686. Thiocyanatometric titration method requires secondary standard solution of potassium thiocyanate that is standardized with standard solution of:
a. Sulfuric acid
b. Hydrochloric acid
c. Copper(II) nitrate
*d. Silver nitrate
e. Iron(II) sulfate
2687. Throughout the last year, a 2-year-old child had frequent infectious diseases of a bacterial genesis with a protracted course. Study of the patient's immunogram detected hypogammaglobulinemia. What cells are most likey to be dysfunctional in this case, causing these clinical presentation and laboratory findings?
a. Phagocytes
*b. B lymphocytes
c. Macrophages
d. NK cells
e. Killer T cells
2688. Throughout the last year, a 2-year-old child had frequent infectious diseases of a bacterial genesis with a protracted course. Study of the patient's immunogram detected hypogammaglobulinemia. What cells are most likey to be dysfunctional in this case, causing these clinical presentation and laboratory findings?
a. Phagocytes
b. Macrophages
c. NK cells
*d. B lymphocytes
e. Killer T cells
2689. Throughout the last year, a 2-year-old child had frequent infectious diseases of a bacterial genesis with a protracted course. Study of the patient's immunogram detected hypogammaglobulinemia. What cells are most likey to be dysfunctional in this case, causing these clinical presentation and laboratory findings?
a. Phagocytes
b. NK cells
*c. B lymphocytes
d. Macrophages
e. Killer T cells
2690. Tissue respiration is accompanied by formation of carbon dioxide and water. What component of the mitochondrial respiratory chain ensures the reduction of oxygen and formation of water?
a. ATP / ADP translocase
b. Acylcarnitine transferase
*c. Cytochrome oxidase
d. Ubiquinone
e. Cytochrome C
2691. Tissue respiration is accompanied by formation of carbon dioxide and water. What component of the mitochondrial respiratory chain ensures the reduction of oxygen and formation of water?
a. ATP / ADP translocase
b. Cytochrome C
c. Acylcarnitine transferase
*d. Cytochrome oxidase
e. Ubiquinone
2692. Tissue respiration is accompanied by formation of carbon dioxide and water. What component of the mitochondrial respiratory chain ensures the reduction of oxygen and formation of water?
a. Ubiquinone
b. Acylcarnitine transferase
*c. Cytochrome oxidase
d. Cytochrome C
e. ATP / ADP translocase
2693. To accurately calculate the reaction velocity constant by the activation energy value, the steric factor is used, which takes into account:
a. Concentration of the reactants
*b. Mutual orientation of the reacting  molecules
c. Chemical properties of the interacting  compounds
d. Temperature of the reaction mixture
e. Structure of the molecules in the  interacting compounds
2694. To accurately calculate the reaction velocity constant by the activation energy value, the steric factor is used, which takes into account:
a. Structure of the molecules in the  interacting compounds
b. Chemical properties of the interacting  compounds
c. Temperature of the reaction mixture
*d. Mutual orientation of the reacting  molecules
e. Concentration of the reactants
2695. To accurately calculate the reaction velocity constant by the activation energy value, the steric factor is used, which takes into account:
a. Temperature of the reaction mixture
*b. Mutual orientation of the reacting  molecules
c. Chemical properties of the interacting  compounds
d. Concentration of the reactants
e. Structure of the molecules in the  interacting compounds
2696. To choose an indicator for acid-base titration, a titration curve needs to be built. This curve reflects the dependence of:
*a. Solution pH from the volume of the  added titrant
b. Solution pH from the temperature
c. Concentration of the analyzed  compound from solution pH
d. Solution pH from the concentration of the added titrant solution
e. Solution pH from the volume of the  solution being analyzed
2697. To choose an indicator for acid-base titration, a titration curve needs to be built. This curve reflects the dependence of:
a. Solution pH from the concentration of the added titrant solution
b. Concentration of the analyzed  compound from solution pH
c. Solution pH from the volume of the  solution being analyzed
d. Solution pH from the temperature
*e. Solution pH from the volume of the  added titrant
2698. To choose an indicator for acid-base titration, a titration curve needs to be built. This curve reflects the dependence of:
a. Solution pH from the temperature
*b. Solution pH from the volume of the  added titrant
c. Concentration of the analyzed  compound from solution pH
d. Solution pH from the volume of the  solution being analyzed
e. Solution pH from the concentration of the added titrant solution
2699. To create a vaccine for hepatitis B prevention the gene responsible for НВsAg production was integrated into the genome of vaccinia virus. What type of vaccine is obtained in this way?
*a. Genetically engineered vaccine
b. Inactivated
c. Synthetic
d. Anatoxin
e. Chemical
2700. To create a vaccine for hepatitis B prevention the gene responsible for НВsAg production was integrated into the genome of vaccinia virus. What type of vaccine is obtained in this way?
a. Inactivated
*b. Genetically engineered vaccine
c. Chemical
d. Synthetic
e. Anatoxin
2701. To create a vaccine for hepatitis B prevention the gene responsible for НВsAg production was integrated into the genome of vaccinia virus. What type of vaccine is obtained in this way?
a. Synthetic
b. Chemical
c. Inactivated
d. Anatoxin
*e. Genetically engineered vaccine
2702. To determine a certain second group cation, the <<golden rain>> reaction is used with slow cooling of the preheated reagents. What reaction product is formed during the slow precipitation?
*a. PbI_2
b. PbCl_2
c. AgI
d. Hg_2I_2
e. HgI_2
2703. To determine a certain second group cation, the <<golden rain>> reaction is used with slow cooling of the preheated reagents. What reaction product is formed during the slow precipitation?
a. AgI
*b. PbI_2
c. Hg_2I_2
d. PbCl_2
e. HgI_2
2704. To determine a certain second group cation, the <<golden rain>> reaction is used with slow cooling of the preheated reagents. What reaction product is formed during the slow precipitation?
a. PbCl_2
b. AgI
c. HgI_2
*d. PbI_2
e. Hg_2I_2
2705. To determine causative agent of the disease, a Gram-stained smear was prepared from the material obtained from the patient with furunculosis. Staphylococci were detected in the smear. What microscopic presentation allows making this conclusion?
*a. Gram-positive cocci in grape-like clusters
b. Gram-positive cocci in short chains
c. Gram-negative cocci in grape-like clusters
d. Gram-negative cocci in short chains
e. Gram-negative bacilli in short chains
2706. To determine causative agent of the disease, a Gram-stained smear was prepared from the material obtained from the patient with furunculosis. Staphylococci were detected in the smear. What microscopic presentation allows making this conclusion?
a. Gram-negative bacilli in short chains
b. Gram-negative cocci in grape-like clusters
*c. Gram-positive cocci in grape-like clusters
d. Gram-negative cocci in short chains
e. Gram-positive cocci in short chains
2707. To determine causative agent of the disease, a Gram-stained smear was prepared from the material obtained from the patient with furunculosis. Staphylococci were detected in the smear. What microscopic presentation allows making this conclusion?
a. Gram-negative cocci in short chains
b. Gram-negative bacilli in short chains
*c. Gram-positive cocci in grape-like clusters
d. Gram-negative cocci in grape-like clusters
e. Gram-positive cocci in short chains
2708. To determine qualitative content of a drug, the drug sample was processed with 2M solution of HCl. White precipitate soluble in aqueous ammonia solution was formed. This analytical effect indicates the presence of the following cations:
a. Lead(II)
b. Mercury(II)
*c. Silver(I)
d. Tin(II)
e. Mercury(I)
2709. To determine qualitative content of a drug, the drug sample was processed with 2M solution of HCl. White precipitate soluble in aqueous ammonia solution was formed. This analytical effect indicates the presence of the following cations:
a. Tin(II)
*b. Silver(I)
c. Mercury(I)
d. Mercury(II)
e. Lead(II)
2710. To determine qualitative content of a drug, the drug sample was processed with 2M solution of HCl. White precipitate soluble in aqueous ammonia solution was formed. This analytical effect indicates the presence of the following cations:
a. Tin(II)
b. Lead(II)
c. Mercury(II)
*d. Silver(I)
e. Mercury(I)
2711. To determine the end point of an acid-base titration the following indicators are used:
*a. рН-indicators
b. Redox indicators
c. Metal indicators
d. Adsorption indicators
e. Luminescent indicators
2712. To determine the end point of an acid-base titration the following indicators are used:
a. Luminescent indicators
*b. рН-indicators
c. Metal indicators
d. Redox indicators
e. Adsorption indicators
2713. To determine the end point of an acid-base titration the following indicators are used:
a. Metal indicators
b. Luminescent indicators
c. Adsorption indicators
d. Redox indicators
*e. рН-indicators
2714. To determine the mass-volume fraction of ammonia in the solution, neutralization back titration was used. Specify the pair of titrants necessary in this case:
*a. HCl, NaOH
b. CH_3COOH, KOH
c. HCl, Hg_2(NO_3)_2
d. HCl, AgNO_3
e. HCl, Hg(NO_3)_2
2715. To determine the mass-volume fraction of ammonia in the solution, neutralization back titration was used. Specify the pair of titrants necessary in this case:
*a. HCl, NaOH
b. HCl, AgNO_3
c. HCl, Hg(NO_3)_2
d. CH_3COOH, KOH
e. HCl, Hg_2(NO_3)_2
2716. To determine the mass-volume fraction of ammonia in the solution, neutralization back titration was used. Specify the pair of titrants necessary in this case:
a. HCl, Hg(NO_3)_2
b. HCl, AgNO_3
*c. HCl, NaOH
d. CH_3COOH, KOH
e. HCl, Hg_2(NO_3)_2
2717. To determine the species of disease agent it is necessary to study its destructive enzymes. What enzyme of those listed below is one of them?
*a. Hyaluronidase
b. Peroxidase
c. Catalase
d. Hydrolase
e. Isomerase
2718. To determine the species of disease agent it is necessary to study its destructive enzymes. What enzyme of those listed below is one of them?
a. Catalase
b. Peroxidase
c. Hydrolase
*d. Hyaluronidase
e. Isomerase
2719. To disinfect a burn surface, an antiseptic was used. When interacting with tissues, this antiseptic releases atomic oxygen and manganese dioxide. What antiseptic was used in this case?
a. Ethyl alcohol
b. Iodine alcohol solution
c. Brilliant green
*d. Potassium permanganate
e. Hydrogen peroxide
2720. To disinfect a burn surface, an antiseptic was used. When interacting with tissues, this antiseptic releases atomic oxygen and manganese dioxide. What antiseptic was used in this case?
a. Iodine alcohol solution
b. Hydrogen peroxide
*c. Potassium permanganate
d. Brilliant green
e. Ethyl alcohol
2721. To disinfect a burn surface, an antiseptic was used. When interacting with tissues, this antiseptic releases atomic oxygen and manganese dioxide. What antiseptic was used in this case?
a. Iodine alcohol solution
b. Hydrogen peroxide
c. Ethyl alcohol
d. Brilliant green
*e. Potassium permanganate
2722. To enhance the solubility of the individual components of a number of liquid drug formulations, the colloidal surfactant are added. This process is based on the following physico-chemical phenomenon:
*a. Solubilization
b. Diffusion
c. Sedimentation
d. Extraction
e. Coagulation
2723. To enhance the solubility of the individual components of a number of liquid drug formulations, the colloidal surfactant are added. This process is based on the following physico-chemical phenomenon:
a. Coagulation
*b. Solubilization
c. Diffusion
d. Extraction
e. Sedimentation
2724. To enhance the solubility of the individual components of a number of liquid drug formulations, the colloidal surfactant are added. This process is based on the following physico-chemical phenomenon:
a. Sedimentation
b. Coagulation
*c. Solubilization
d. Extraction
e. Diffusion
2725. To identify a drug by thin-layer chromatography the following parameter is used:
*a. R_f
b. I, A
c. E, mV
d. K_p
e. n
2726. To identify a drug by thin-layer chromatography the following parameter is used:
a. I, A
b. E, mV
*c. R_f
d. K_p
e. n
2727. To identify a drug by thin-layer chromatography the following parameter is used:
a. K_p
b. E, mV
c. I, A
d. n
*e. R_f
2728. To identify iodide ions in a solution, a reaction with lead cations was conducted. The obtained precipitate was dissolved in water by means of heating; afterwards the test glass was cooled. What analytical effect could be observed in the process?
a. Blue precipitate
b. Brown precipitate
*c. Golden scales
d. White precipitate
e. Gas bubbles
2729. To identify iodide ions in a solution, a reaction with lead cations was conducted. The obtained precipitate was dissolved in water by means of heating; afterwards the test glass was cooled. What analytical effect could be observed in the process?
a. Gas bubbles
*b. Golden scales
c. Brown precipitate
d. Blue precipitate
e. White precipitate
2730. To identify iodide ions in a solution, a reaction with lead cations was conducted. The obtained precipitate was dissolved in water by means of heating; afterwards the test glass was cooled. What analytical effect could be observed in the process?
a. White precipitate
b. Brown precipitate
c. Blue precipitate
*d. Golden scales
e. Gas bubbles
2731. To induce diabetes mellitus in a rabbit, beta-cells of pancreatic islets (islets of Langerhans) were selectively damaged with alloxan. What method of diabetes induction was used in this experiment?
*a. Shutdown
b. Irritation
c. Stimulation
d. Introduction of enzymes, hormones
e. Isolated organs
2732. To induce diabetes mellitus in a rabbit, beta-cells of pancreatic islets (islets of Langerhans) were selectively damaged with alloxan. What method of diabetes induction was used in this experiment?
a. Introduction of enzymes, hormones
*b. Shutdown
c. Irritation
d. Isolated organs
e. Stimulation
2733. To induce diabetes mellitus in a rabbit, beta-cells of pancreatic islets (islets of Langerhans) were selectively damaged with alloxan. What method of diabetes induction was used in this experiment?
a. Stimulation
*b. Shutdown
c. Isolated organs
d. Irritation
e. Introduction of enzymes, hormones
2734. To introduce a medicine into the body through the airways, the following type of substance must be used:
a. Foam
b. Emulsion
c. Suspension
d. Ointment
*e. Aerosol
2735. To introduce a medicine into the body through the airways, the following type of substance must be used:
a. Ointment
*b. Aerosol
c. Foam
d. Emulsion
e. Suspension
2736. To introduce a medicine into the body through the airways, the following type of substance must be used:
a. Ointment
b. Foam
c. Suspension
*d. Aerosol
e. Emulsion
2737. To isolate a pure culture of the disease's pathogen, its specific biological properties were used: growth at low temperatures, type of respiration, pathogenicity for laboratory animals, growth on selective nutrient media, and the ability for "creeping growth" on the surface of the medium. What microbial culture is expected to be isolated in this case?
a. Enterococcus faecalis
b. Pseudomonas aeruginosa
c. Staphylococcus aureus
*d. Proteus vulgaris
e. Yersinia pestis
2738. To isolate a pure culture of the disease's pathogen, its specific biological properties were used: growth at low temperatures, type of respiration, pathogenicity for laboratory animals, growth on selective nutrient media, and the ability for "creeping growth" on the surface of the medium. What microbial culture is expected to be isolated in this case?
a. Pseudomonas aeruginosa
b. Yersinia pestis
c. Enterococcus faecalis
d. Staphylococcus aureus
*e. Proteus vulgaris
2739. To isolate a pure culture of the disease's pathogen, its specific biological properties were used: growth at low temperatures, type of respiration, pathogenicity for laboratory animals, growth on selective nutrient media, and the ability for "creeping growth" on the surface of the medium. What microbial culture is expected to be isolated in this case?
a. Yersinia pestis
*b. Proteus vulgaris
c. Enterococcus faecalis
d. Staphylococcus aureus
e. Pseudomonas aeruginosa
2740. To obtain water-soluble iodine preparations (iodoforms), iodine is  dissolved in surfactants that form micelles. The process, when compounds that are insoluble in a certain solvent, spontaneously dissolve in the micellar systems, is called:
a. Adsorption
*b. Solubilization
c. Neutralization
d. Sedimentation
e. Coagulation
2741. To obtain water-soluble iodine preparations (iodoforms), iodine is  dissolved in surfactants that form micelles. The process, when compounds that are insoluble in a certain solvent, spontaneously dissolve in the micellar systems, is called:
a. Neutralization
b. Adsorption
*c. Solubilization
d. Coagulation
e. Sedimentation
2742. To prevent the development of muscular dystrophy, a doctor prescribed potassium orotate to a patient. This compound is an intermediate product of the synthesis of a certain substance. What substance is it?
a. Bile acids
b. Cholesterol
*c. Pyrimidine nucleotides
d. Glucose
e. Ketone bodies
2743. To prevent the development of muscular dystrophy, a doctor prescribed potassium orotate to a patient. This compound is an intermediate product of the synthesis of a certain substance. What substance is it?
a. Bile acids
b. Ketone bodies
c. Glucose
*d. Pyrimidine nucleotides
e. Cholesterol
2744. To prevent the development of muscular dystrophy, a doctor prescribed potassium orotate to a patient. This compound is an intermediate product of the synthesis of a certain substance. What substance is it?
a. Cholesterol
b. Bile acids
*c. Pyrimidine nucleotides
d. Ketone bodies
e. Glucose
2745. To quantitatively determine Fe^3+ ions, a photometric reaction with sulfosalicylic acid was conducted. Photometric determination of the obtained solution requires measuring of the following:
a. Refractive index
*b. Optical density
c. Wavelength
d. Specific rotation
e. Half-wave potential
2746. To quantitatively determine Fe^3+ ions, a photometric reaction with sulfosalicylic acid was conducted. Photometric determination of the obtained solution requires measuring of the following:
a. Refractive index
b. Specific rotation
c. Half-wave potential
d. Wavelength
*e. Optical density
2747. To quantitatively determine Fe^3+ ions, a photometric reaction with sulfosalicylic acid was conducted. Photometric determination of the obtained solution requires measuring of the following:
a. Wavelength
*b. Optical density
c. Half-wave potential
d. Specific rotation
e. Refractive index
2748. To quickly relieve the state of acute psychosis, the patient was prescribed a rapid/short-acting psychotropic drug. Name this drug:
a. Amitriptyline
b. Piracetam
c. Valerian extract
*d. Droperidol
e. Caffeine and sodium benzoate
2749. To quickly relieve the state of acute psychosis, the patient was prescribed a rapid/short-acting psychotropic drug. Name this drug:
a. Amitriptyline
b. Valerian extract
c. Piracetam
d. Caffeine and sodium benzoate
*e. Droperidol
2750. To quickly relieve the state of acute psychosis, the patient was prescribed a rapid/short-acting psychotropic drug. Name this drug:
a. Valerian extract
*b. Droperidol
c. Caffeine and sodium benzoate
d. Amitriptyline
e. Piracetam
2751. To quickly stop an attack of angina pectoris, a 55-year-old patient was prescribed an organic nitrate drug. What drug is it?
a. Nifedipine
b. Labetalol
*c. Nitroglycerin
d. Octadine (Guanethidine)
e. Prazosin
2752. To quickly stop an attack of angina pectoris, a 55-year-old patient was prescribed an organic nitrate drug. What drug is it?
a. Octadine (Guanethidine)
*b. Nitroglycerin
c. Prazosin
d. Labetalol
e. Nifedipine
2753. To quickly stop an attack of angina pectoris, a 55-year-old patient was prescribed an organic nitrate drug. What drug is it?
a. Prazosin
b. Nifedipine
*c. Nitroglycerin
d. Octadine (Guanethidine)
e. Labetalol
2754. To relieve dry cough, a patient with bronchitis was prescribed a drug that is an alkaloid of yellow horned-poppy. Name this drug:
*a. Glaucine hydrochloride
b. Codeine phosphate
c. Oxeladin
d. Codterpin
e. Libexin (Prenoxdiazine)
2755. To relieve dry cough, a patient with bronchitis was prescribed a drug that is an alkaloid of yellow horned-poppy. Name this drug:
a. Codterpin
*b. Glaucine hydrochloride
c. Oxeladin
d. Codeine phosphate
e. Libexin (Prenoxdiazine)
2756. To relieve dry cough, a patient with bronchitis was prescribed a drug that is an alkaloid of yellow horned-poppy. Name this drug:
a. Libexin (Prenoxdiazine)
*b. Glaucine hydrochloride
c. Codeine phosphate
d. Codterpin
e. Oxeladin
2757. To reproduce Ehrlich carcinoma in a rabbit, a certain amount of benzpyrene (a polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon) was daily applied to a dehaired patch of skin of the animal. What method is used for tumor modelling in this case?
*a. Induction
b. Ionizing radiation
c. Hormone administration
d. Transplantation
e. Explantation
2758. To reproduce Ehrlich carcinoma in a rabbit, a certain amount of benzpyrene (a polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon) was daily applied to a dehaired patch of skin of the animal. What method is used for tumor modelling in this case?
a. Explantation
*b. Induction
c. Transplantation
d. Hormone administration
e. Ionizing radiation
2759. To reproduce Ehrlich carcinoma in a rabbit, a certain amount of benzpyrene (a polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon) was daily applied to a dehaired patch of skin of the animal. What method is used for tumor modelling in this case?
a. Ionizing radiation
b. Transplantation
c. Explantation
*d. Induction
e. Hormone administration
2760. To stimulate birth activity, a certain neurohypophyseal hormone is used. Name this hormone:
a. Insulin
b. Glucagon
*c. Oxytocin
d. Testosterone
e. Thyroxine
2761. To stimulate birth activity, a certain neurohypophyseal hormone is used. Name this hormone:
a. Insulin
b. Testosterone
c. Glucagon
d. Thyroxine
*e. Oxytocin
2762. To stimulate birth activity, a certain neurohypophyseal hormone is used. Name this hormone:
a. Insulin
b. Thyroxine
c. Glucagon
d. Testosterone
*e. Oxytocin
2763. To study the sanitary and microbiological quality of water at a laboratory, the minimum volume of water, in which bacteria of the Escherichia coli group can be detected, was determined. According to the State Standard of Ukraine, this value must be no less than:
*a. 300
b. 200
c. 100
d. 400
e. 500
2764. To study the sanitary and microbiological quality of water at a laboratory, the minimum volume of water, in which bacteria of the Escherichia coli group can be detected, was determined. According to the State Standard of Ukraine, this value must be no less than:
*a. 300
b. 400
c. 100
d. 500
e. 200
2765. To study the sanitary and microbiological quality of water at a laboratory, the minimum volume of water, in which bacteria of the Escherichia coli group can be detected, was determined. According to the State Standard of Ukraine, this value must be no less than:
a. 100
b. 400
*c. 300
d. 500
e. 200
2766. To treat atherosclerosis a patient has obtained hypolipidemic agent - Fenofibrate - from pharmacy. What is the pharmacological group of this drug?
a. Muscarinic cholinergic receptor antagonists
b. Calcium channel blocking agents
c. Nitrofuranes
*d. Fibrates
e. beta-adrenergic blocking agents
2767. To treat atherosclerosis a patient has obtained hypolipidemic agent - Fenofibrate - from pharmacy. What is the pharmacological group of this drug?
a. Muscarinic cholinergic receptor antagonists
b. Calcium channel blocking agents
c. Nitrofuranes
d. beta-adrenergic blocking agents
*e. Fibrates
2768. To treat atherosclerosis a patient has obtained hypolipidemic agent - Fenofibrate - from pharmacy. What is the pharmacological group of this drug?
a. Nitrofuranes
*b. Fibrates
c. Muscarinic cholinergic receptor antagonists
d. Calcium channel blocking agents
e. beta-adrenergic blocking agents
2769. To treat glaucoma a doctor made a decision to prescribe a cholinomimetic agent of direct action. Name this drug:
*a. Pilocarpine hydrochloride
b. Atropine sulfate
c. Platyphylline hydrotartrate
d. Zinc sulfate
e. Sulfacyl-sodium (Sulfacetamide)
2770. To treat glaucoma a doctor made a decision to prescribe a cholinomimetic agent of direct action. Name this drug:
*a. Pilocarpine hydrochloride
b. Platyphylline hydrotartrate
c. Atropine sulfate
d. Zinc sulfate
e. Sulfacyl-sodium (Sulfacetamide)
2771. To treat glaucoma a doctor made a decision to prescribe a cholinomimetic agent of direct action. Name this drug:
a. Atropine sulfate
b. Zinc sulfate
*c. Pilocarpine hydrochloride
d. Platyphylline hydrotartrate
e. Sulfacyl-sodium (Sulfacetamide)
2772. To treat peptic ulcer disease of the stomach, the patient was prescribed an Н_2-receptor antagonist under the brand name of Quamatel. What can be used as a substitute, if this brand is not available in the pharmacy?
*a. Famotidine
b. De-Nol (Bismuth subnitrate)
c. Omeprazole
d. Pirenzepine
e. Pantoprazole
2773. To treat peptic ulcer disease of the stomach, the patient was prescribed an Н_2-receptor antagonist under the brand name of Quamatel. What can be used as a substitute, if this brand is not available in the pharmacy?
*a. Famotidine
b. Omeprazole
c. De-Nol (Bismuth subnitrate)
d. Pantoprazole
e. Pirenzepine
2774. To treat peptic ulcer disease of the stomach, the patient was prescribed an Н_2-receptor antagonist under the brand name of Quamatel. What can be used as a substitute, if this brand is not available in the pharmacy?
a. De-Nol (Bismuth subnitrate)
b. Pirenzepine
c. Omeprazole
d. Pantoprazole
*e. Famotidine
2775. Transformation C_2H_4 (alkene) longrightarrow C_2H_6 (alkane) occurs during the following reaction:
a. Dehydration
b. Dehydrogenation
*c. Hydrogenation
d. Dimerization
e. Hydration
2776. Transformation C_2H_4 (alkene) longrightarrow C_2H_6 (alkane) occurs during the following reaction:
a. Hydration
b. Dimerization
c. Dehydration
d. Dehydrogenation
*e. Hydrogenation
2777. Transverse section of an axial organ has revealed conductive bundle with phloem and xylem radiating in separate alternate areas. Name the organ and type of conductive bundle:
*a. Bundle is radial, organ is root of primary structure
b. Bundle is amphivasal (lepto centric), organ is monocotyledon rhizome
c. Bundle is amphicribal (hadro centric), organ is fern rhizome
d. Bundle is collateral open, organ is dicotyledon stem
e. Bundle is collateral closed, organ is monocotyledon stem
2778. Transverse section of an axial organ has revealed conductive bundle with phloem and xylem radiating in separate alternate areas. Name the organ and type of conductive bundle:
*a. Bundle is radial, organ is root of primary structure
b. Bundle is collateral closed, organ is monocotyledon stem
c. Bundle is collateral open, organ is dicotyledon stem
d. Bundle is amphicribal (hadro centric), organ is fern rhizome
e. Bundle is amphivasal (lepto centric), organ is monocotyledon rhizome
2779. Transverse section of an axial organ has revealed conductive bundle with phloem and xylem radiating in separate alternate areas. Name the organ and type of conductive bundle:
a. Bundle is amphivasal (lepto centric), organ is monocotyledon rhizome
*b. Bundle is radial, organ is root of primary structure
c. Bundle is collateral open, organ is dicotyledon stem
d. Bundle is amphicribal (hadro centric), organ is fern rhizome
e. Bundle is collateral closed, organ is monocotyledon stem
2780. Treatment of withdrawal syndrome in cases of morphine discontinuation requires the use of a drug that is an opiate receptor antagonist. Select this drug from the list.
a. Codeine phosphate
*b. Naloxone hydrochloride
c. Omnopon
d. Riboflavin
e. Ketorolac
2781. Treatment of withdrawal syndrome in cases of morphine discontinuation requires the use of a drug that is an opiate receptor antagonist. Select this drug from the list.
a. Codeine phosphate
b. Riboflavin
c. Omnopon
d. Ketorolac
*e. Naloxone hydrochloride
2782. Treatment of withdrawal syndrome in cases of morphine discontinuation requires the use of a drug that is an opiate receptor antagonist. Select this drug from the list.
a. Omnopon
b. Riboflavin
c. Codeine phosphate
*d. Naloxone hydrochloride
e. Ketorolac
2783. Trimerization of acetylene results in the following product:
*a. Benzene (benzol)
b. 2-Butyne
c. Vinylacetylene
d. Cyclooctatetraene
e. Trimethylbenzene
2784. Trimerization of acetylene results in the following product:
a. 2-Butyne
b. Cyclooctatetraene
*c. Benzene (benzol)
d. Trimethylbenzene
e. Vinylacetylene
2785. Trimerization of acetylene results in the following product:
a. Trimethylbenzene
*b. Benzene (benzol)
c. Cyclooctatetraene
d. Vinylacetylene
e. 2-Butyne
2786. Trypsin is a proteolytic enzyme used to clean purulent wounds. Combined with water, it causes the breakdown of complex organic compounds (proteins, peptides) into simpler ones. According to the modern international Nomenclature and Classification of Enzymes, trypsin belongs to:
a. Ligases
b. Isomerases
c. Transferases
*d. Hydrolases
e. Oxidoreductases
2787. Trypsin is a proteolytic enzyme used to clean purulent wounds. Combined with water, it causes the breakdown of complex organic compounds (proteins, peptides) into simpler ones. According to the modern international Nomenclature and Classification of Enzymes, trypsin belongs to:
a. Transferases
*b. Hydrolases
c. Ligases
d. Oxidoreductases
e. Isomerases
2788. Trypsin is a proteolytic enzyme used to clean purulent wounds. Combined with water, it causes the breakdown of complex organic compounds (proteins, peptides) into simpler ones. According to the modern international Nomenclature and Classification of Enzymes, trypsin belongs to:
a. Transferases
b. Oxidoreductases
c. Isomerases
*d. Hydrolases
e. Ligases
2789. Ultramicroscopy is used to determine the radius of dispersed phase particles. The following should be measured to make the necessary calculations:
*a. Number of particles in a definite volume
b. Time interval in which a tagged particle travels a certain distance
c. Intensity of transmitted light
d. Distance traveled by a tagged particle
e. Intensity of scattered light
2790. Ultramicroscopy is used to determine the radius of dispersed phase particles. The following should be measured to make the necessary calculations:
a. Intensity of transmitted light
*b. Number of particles in a definite volume
c. Distance traveled by a tagged particle
d. Intensity of scattered light
e. Time interval in which a tagged particle travels a certain distance
2791. Ultramicroscopy is used to determine the radius of dispersed phase particles. The following should be measured to make the necessary calculations:
a. Intensity of transmitted light
b. Intensity of scattered light
c. Time interval in which a tagged particle travels a certain distance
*d. Number of particles in a definite volume
e. Distance traveled by a tagged particle
2792. Ultraviolet irradiation is used in medicine in various physiotherapeutic procedures. What mechanism of medicinal action is characteristic of ultraviolet rays?
a. Decrease of melanin synthesis in the skin
*b. Activation of vitamin D synthesis
c. Activation of lipid peroxidation
d. Intensification of cell division
e. Activation of drug action
2793. Ultraviolet irradiation is used in medicine in various physiotherapeutic procedures. What mechanism of medicinal action is characteristic of ultraviolet rays?
a. Decrease of melanin synthesis in the skin
b. Activation of lipid peroxidation
c. Activation of drug action
*d. Activation of vitamin D synthesis
e. Intensification of cell division
2794. Ultraviolet irradiation is used in medicine in various physiotherapeutic procedures. What mechanism of medicinal action is characteristic of ultraviolet rays?
a. Decrease of melanin synthesis in the skin
b. Intensification of cell division
*c. Activation of vitamin D synthesis
d. Activation of drug action
e. Activation of lipid peroxidation
2795. Under certain conditions, solutions of high-molecular substances can lose their flowability, meaning that the bonds begin to form between macromolecules, leading to the formation of a spatial grid. Name this process:
*a. Gel formation
b. Condensation
c. Peptization
d. Coagulation
e. Coacervation
2796. Under certain conditions, solutions of high-molecular substances can lose their flowability, meaning that the bonds begin to form between macromolecules, leading to the formation of a spatial grid. Name this process:
a. Coacervation
*b. Gel formation
c. Peptization
d. Condensation
e. Coagulation
2797. Under certain conditions, solutions of high-molecular substances can lose their flowability, meaning that the bonds begin to form between macromolecules, leading to the formation of a spatial grid. Name this process:
a. Condensation
b. Coacervation
c. Coagulation
*d. Gel formation
e. Peptization
2798. Under what condition is the solubilization process possible?
a. Surfactant concentration in the solution is arbitrary
*b. Surfactant is in the form of micelles
c. Surfactant is in the form of molecules
d. Surfactant was comminuted before the dissolution
e. Solute has high solubility in a certain solvent
2799. Under what condition is the solubilization process possible?
a. Surfactant concentration in the solution is arbitrary
b. Surfactant was comminuted before the dissolution
c. Surfactant is in the form of molecules
d. Solute has high solubility in a certain solvent
*e. Surfactant is in the form of micelles
2800. Under what condition is the solubilization process possible?
a. Surfactant was comminuted before the dissolution
b. Surfactant is in the form of molecules
c. Surfactant concentration in the solution is arbitrary
*d. Surfactant is in the form of micelles
e. Solute has high solubility in a certain solvent
2801. Upon examination of a flower it is determined to have one pistil made up of single free carpel. Therefore, this gynoecium can be identified as:
*a. Monocarpous
b. Lysicarpous
c. Paracarpous
d. Syncarpous
e. Apocarpous
2802. Upon examination of a flower it is determined to have one pistil made up of single free carpel. Therefore, this gynoecium can be identified as:
a. Apocarpous
b. Paracarpous
*c. Monocarpous
d. Syncarpous
e. Lysicarpous
2803. Upon examination of a flower it is determined to have one pistil made up of single free carpel. Therefore, this gynoecium can be identified as:
a. Lysicarpous
b. Syncarpous
c. Apocarpous
d. Paracarpous
*e. Monocarpous
2804. Upon taking a herbal medicine, a 30-year-old patient has developed anaphylactic allergic reaction. Blood leukocytosis was observed. What kind of leukocytosis is characteristic of this case?
*a. Eosinophilia
b. Basophilia
c. Lymphocytosis
d. Heutrophilia
e. Monocytosis
2805. Upon taking a herbal medicine, a 30-year-old patient has developed anaphylactic allergic reaction. Blood leukocytosis was observed. What kind of leukocytosis is characteristic of this case?
a. Lymphocytosis
b. Monocytosis
c. Basophilia
d. Heutrophilia
*e. Eosinophilia
2806. Upon taking a herbal medicine, a 30-year-old patient has developed anaphylactic allergic reaction. Blood leukocytosis was observed. What kind of leukocytosis is characteristic of this case?
a. Monocytosis
b. Basophilia
*c. Eosinophilia
d. Heutrophilia
e. Lymphocytosis
2807. Uric acid is the end product of purine nucleotide breakdown. Elevated levels of uric acid in blood lead to the development of:
*a. Gout
b. Diabetes mellitus
c. Glycogenosis
d. Gastritis
e. Hepatitis
2808. Uric acid is the end product of purine nucleotide breakdown. Elevated levels of uric acid in blood lead to the development of:
a. Gastritis
b. Diabetes mellitus
c. Hepatitis
*d. Gout
e. Glycogenosis
2809. Uric acid is the end product of purine nucleotide breakdown. Elevated levels of uric acid in blood lead to the development of:
a. Gastritis
b. Hepatitis
*c. Gout
d. Glycogenosis
e. Diabetes mellitus
2810. Velamen is a specific multilayer absorbent tissue that often is photosynthetic. It provides protection against mechanical damage and water loss. It is formed on the roots of the following type of plants:
a. Hygrophytes
*b. Epiphytes
c. Mesophytes
d. Xerophytes
e. Hydrophytes
2811. Velamen is a specific multilayer absorbent tissue that often is photosynthetic. It provides protection against mechanical damage and water loss. It is formed on the roots of the following type of plants:
a. Mesophytes
b. Xerophytes
c. Hydrophytes
*d. Epiphytes
e. Hygrophytes
2812. Velamen is a specific multilayer absorbent tissue that often is photosynthetic. It provides protection against mechanical damage and water loss. It is formed on the roots of the following type of plants:
a. Xerophytes
b. Mesophytes
*c. Epiphytes
d. Hygrophytes
e. Hydrophytes
2813. Vitamin B_6 is a part of the pyridoxal phosphate coenzyme (PLP). What reactions involve PLP?
*a. Decarboxylation and transamination of amino acids
b. Synthesis of bile acids and cholesterol
c. Synthesis of steroid hormones and  cholesterol
d. Synthesis of ketone bodies and bile  acids
e. Synthesis of nucleic acids and  phospholipids
2814. Vitamin B_6 is a part of the pyridoxal phosphate coenzyme (PLP). What reactions involve PLP?
a. Synthesis of steroid hormones and  cholesterol
*b. Decarboxylation and transamination of amino acids
c. Synthesis of ketone bodies and bile  acids
d. Synthesis of nucleic acids and  phospholipids
e. Synthesis of bile acids and cholesterol
2815. Vitamin B_6 is a part of the pyridoxal phosphate coenzyme (PLP). What reactions involve PLP?
a. Synthesis of steroid hormones and  cholesterol
b. Synthesis of ketone bodies and bile  acids
c. Synthesis of nucleic acids and  phospholipids
d. Synthesis of bile acids and cholesterol
*e. Decarboxylation and transamination of amino acids
2816. Vitamins and vitamin-like compounds are required for activation of higher fatty acids and their transport through the mitochondrial membrane. Name one such compound:
a. Riboflavin
b. Ubiquinone
c. Thiamine
d. Biotin
*e. Carnitine
2817. Vitamins and vitamin-like compounds are required for activation of higher fatty acids and their transport through the mitochondrial membrane. Name one such compound:
a. Thiamine
b. Biotin
*c. Carnitine
d. Ubiquinone
e. Riboflavin
2818. Vitamins and vitamin-like compounds are required for activation of higher fatty acids and their transport through the mitochondrial membrane. Name one such compound:
a. Ubiquinone
*b. Carnitine
c. Riboflavin
d. Biotin
e. Thiamine
2819. What Brassicaceae family plant has a cardiotonic effect?
a. Capsella bursa-pastoris
b. Adonis vernalis
c. Rheum tanguticum
*d. Erysimum diffusum
e. Leonurus cardiaca
2820. What Brassicaceae family plant has a cardiotonic effect?
a. Capsella bursa-pastoris
b. Rheum tanguticum
c. Leonurus cardiaca
*d. Erysimum diffusum
e. Adonis vernalis
2821. What Brassicaceae family plant has a cardiotonic effect?
a. Leonurus cardiaca
b. Adonis vernalis
*c. Erysimum diffusum
d. Capsella bursa-pastoris
e. Rheum tanguticum
2822. What analytical effect is observed during fixation of the end point in the Volhard titration?
a. A red precipitate is produced
*b. The solution colors red
c. A yellow precipitate is produced
d. The solution colors yellow
e. A brown precipitate is produced
2823. What analytical effect is observed during fixation of the end point in the Volhard titration?
a. A yellow precipitate is produced
b. A red precipitate is produced
c. A brown precipitate is produced
*d. The solution colors red
e. The solution colors yellow
2824. What analytical effect is observed during fixation of the end point in the Volhard titration?
a. A yellow precipitate is produced
b. The solution colors yellow
c. A brown precipitate is produced
*d. The solution colors red
e. A red precipitate is produced
2825. What analytical effect is observed when a solution that contains acetate ions is heated with ethyl alcohol and concentrated sulfuric acid?
a. Formation of a black precipitate
*b. Release of a characteristic odor
c. Formation of a blue precipitate
d. Formation of a white precipitate
e. Formation of a yellow precipitate
2826. What analytical effect is observed when a solution that contains acetate ions is heated with ethyl alcohol and concentrated sulfuric acid?
a. Formation of a blue precipitate
b. Formation of a black precipitate
c. Formation of a white precipitate
*d. Release of a characteristic odor
e. Formation of a yellow precipitate
2827. What analytical effect is observed when a solution that contains acetate ions is heated with ethyl alcohol and concentrated sulfuric acid?
a. Formation of a blue precipitate
b. Formation of a yellow precipitate
c. Formation of a black precipitate
*d. Release of a characteristic odor
e. Formation of a white precipitate
2828. What analytical method can be used to quantify hydrogen peroxide without any special indicators?
a. Argentometry
b. Nitritometry
*c. Permanganatometry
d. Complexonometry
e. Iodometry
2829. What analytical method can be used to quantify hydrogen peroxide without any special indicators?
a. Complexonometry
b. Argentometry
c. Nitritometry
d. Iodometry
*e. Permanganatometry
2830. What analytical method can be used to quantify hydrogen peroxide without any special indicators?
a. Iodometry
b. Argentometry
c. Nitritometry
*d. Permanganatometry
e. Complexonometry
2831. What anion of the 2nd analytic group produces black precipitate with group reagent AgNO_3?
*a. S^2-
b. I^-
c. NCS^-
d. Br^-
e. Cl^-
2832. What anion of the 2nd analytic group produces black precipitate with group reagent AgNO_3?
a. I^-
b. Cl^-
*c. S^2-
d. NCS^-
e. Br^-
2833. What anion of the 2nd analytic group produces black precipitate with group reagent AgNO_3?
a. I^-
b. Cl^-
c. NCS^-
d. Br^-
*e. S^2-
2834. What anions form a precipitate soluble in 12% ammonium carbonate solution as a result of their interaction with a silver(I) nitrate solution?
*a. Chloride ions
b. Sulfide ions
c. Bromide ions
d. Thiocyanate ions
e. Iodide ions
2835. What anions form a precipitate soluble in 12% ammonium carbonate solution as a result of their interaction with a silver(I) nitrate solution?
*a. Chloride ions
b. Thiocyanate ions
c. Iodide ions
d. Sulfide ions
e. Bromide ions
2836. What anions form a precipitate soluble in 12% ammonium carbonate solution as a result of their interaction with a silver(I) nitrate solution?
a. Bromide ions
b. Iodide ions
c. Thiocyanate ions
*d. Chloride ions
e. Sulfide ions
2837. What anions interfere with the determination of halide ions by means of the Volhard method, because they form a strong colorless complex with iron(III) ions?
a. MnO_4^-
b. NO_3^-
*c. F^-
d. NO_2^-
e. SO_3^2-
2838. What anions interfere with the determination of halide ions by means of the Volhard method, because they form a strong colorless complex with iron(III) ions?
a. MnO_4^-
b. SO_3^2-
c. NO_2^-
*d. F^-
e. NO_3^-
2839. What anions interfere with the determination of halide ions by means of the Volhard method, because they form a strong colorless complex with iron(III) ions?
a. SO_3^2-
b. MnO_4^-
*c. F^-
d. NO_2^-
e. NO_3^-
2840. What anti-gout drug, based on its mechanism of action, is a urate-lowering agent and a xanthine oxidase inhibitor?
*a. Allopurinol
b. Urolesane
c. Urosulfan (Sulfacarbamide)
d. Urodan
e. Etamide
2841. What anti-gout drug, based on its mechanism of action, is a urate-lowering agent and a xanthine oxidase inhibitor?
*a. Allopurinol
b. Urosulfan (Sulfacarbamide)
c. Etamide
d. Urodan
e. Urolesane
2842. What anti-gout drug, based on its mechanism of action, is a urate-lowering agent and a xanthine oxidase inhibitor?
a. Urosulfan (Sulfacarbamide)
*b. Allopurinol
c. Etamide
d. Urodan
e. Urolesane
2843. What antibiotic is a drug of choice for treatment of syphilis?
a. Lincomycin hydrochloride
b. Streptomycin sulfate
c. Levorin sodium salt
d. Polymyxin M sulfate
*e. Benzylpenicillin sodium salt (Penicillin G sodium salt)
2844. What antibiotic is a drug of choice for treatment of syphilis?
a. Polymyxin M sulfate
b. Streptomycin sulfate
c. Levorin sodium salt
*d. Benzylpenicillin sodium salt (Penicillin G sodium salt)
e. Lincomycin hydrochloride
2845. What antibiotic is a drug of choice for treatment of syphilis?
a. Streptomycin sulfate
b. Levorin sodium salt
c. Polymyxin M sulfate
*d. Benzylpenicillin sodium salt (Penicillin G sodium salt)
e. Lincomycin hydrochloride
2846. What antibiotic is used for treatment of syphilis?
*a. Benzylpenicillin
b. Amphotericin
c. Streptomycin
d. Kanamycin
e. Nystatin
2847. What antibiotic is used for treatment of syphilis?
*a. Benzylpenicillin
b. Nystatin
c. Amphotericin
d. Kanamycin
e. Streptomycin
2848. What antibiotic is used for treatment of syphilis?
a. Streptomycin
*b. Benzylpenicillin
c. Amphotericin
d. Kanamycin
e. Nystatin
2849. What anticholinesterase agent is used to stimulate intestinal peristalsis in the patients during the postoperative period?
a. Dithylin (Suxamethonium)
b. Metoprolol
*c. Prozerin (Neostigmine)
d. Adrenaline hydrochloride
e. Salbutamol
2850. What anticholinesterase agent is used to stimulate intestinal peristalsis in the patients during the postoperative period?
a. Metoprolol
b. Adrenaline hydrochloride
c. Salbutamol
d. Dithylin (Suxamethonium)
*e. Prozerin (Neostigmine)
2851. What anticholinesterase agent is used to stimulate intestinal peristalsis in the patients during the postoperative period?
a. Salbutamol
b. Adrenaline hydrochloride
*c. Prozerin (Neostigmine)
d. Dithylin (Suxamethonium)
e. Metoprolol
2852. What antidote must be used in case of narcotic analgesics overdose?
*a. Naloxone
b. Unithiol (Dimercaptopropansulfonate  sodium)
c. Calcium chloride
d. Diazepam
e. Caffeine and sodium benzoate
2853. What antidote must be used in case of narcotic analgesics overdose?
a. Diazepam
b. Unithiol (Dimercaptopropansulfonate  sodium)
c. Calcium chloride
*d. Naloxone
e. Caffeine and sodium benzoate
2854. What antidote must be used in case of narcotic analgesics overdose?
a. Unithiol (Dimercaptopropansulfonate  sodium)
b. Diazepam
c. Caffeine and sodium benzoate
*d. Naloxone
e. Calcium chloride
2855. What antifungal antibiotic is poorly absorbed in the gastrointestinal tract and is effective against intestinal candidiasis?
a. Griseofulvin
*b. Nystatin
c. Fluconazole
d. Terbinafine
e. Ketoconazole
2856. What antifungal antibiotic is poorly absorbed in the gastrointestinal tract and is effective against intestinal candidiasis?
a. Griseofulvin
*b. Nystatin
c. Ketoconazole
d. Terbinafine
e. Fluconazole
2857. What antifungal antibiotic is poorly absorbed in the gastrointestinal tract and is effective against intestinal candidiasis?
a. Ketoconazole
*b. Nystatin
c. Terbinafine
d. Griseofulvin
e. Fluconazole
2858. What antihistamine with marked sedative effect should be prescribed to be taken before bed?
a. Aerius (Desloratadine)
*b. Dimedrol (Diphenhydramin)
c. Loratadine
d. Fexofenadine
e. Guttalax (Sodium picosulfate)
2859. What antihistamine with marked sedative effect should be prescribed to be taken before bed?
a. Fexofenadine
*b. Dimedrol (Diphenhydramin)
c. Loratadine
d. Aerius (Desloratadine)
e. Guttalax (Sodium picosulfate)
2860. What antihistamine with marked sedative effect should be prescribed to be taken before bed?
a. Fexofenadine
b. Guttalax (Sodium picosulfate)
*c. Dimedrol (Diphenhydramin)
d. Loratadine
e. Aerius (Desloratadine)
2861. What bacteria indicate the presence of fecal contamination?
a. Anthracoids
b. Serratia
c. Sarcina
*d. Escherichia coli
e. Klebsiella
2862. What bacteria indicate the presence of fecal contamination?
a. Sarcina
b. Klebsiella
c. Anthracoids
*d. Escherichia coli
e. Serratia
2863. What bacteria indicate the presence of fecal contamination?
a. Serratia
*b. Escherichia coli
c. Klebsiella
d. Sarcina
e. Anthracoids
2864. What broad-spectrum antibiotic is contraindicated for children under 14 years of age because it disrupts the formation of the skeleton?
*a. Doxycycline
b. Ampicillin
c. Azithromycin
d. Ceftriaxone
e. Acyclovir
2865. What broad-spectrum antibiotic is contraindicated for children under 14 years of age because it disrupts the formation of the skeleton?
a. Acyclovir
*b. Doxycycline
c. Ampicillin
d. Azithromycin
e. Ceftriaxone
2866. What broad-spectrum antibiotic is contraindicated for children under 14 years of age because it disrupts the formation of the skeleton?
a. Ceftriaxone
b. Azithromycin
*c. Doxycycline
d. Acyclovir
e. Ampicillin
2867. What carboxylic acid is an aromatic monocarboxylic acid and can be used in treatment of skin diseases as an external antiseptic and fungicide?
a. Formic acid
b. Acetic acid
c. Valeric acid
*d. Benzoic acid
e. Butyric acid
2868. What carboxylic acid is an aromatic monocarboxylic acid and can be used in treatment of skin diseases as an external antiseptic and fungicide?
a. Valeric acid
b. Acetic acid
c. Formic acid
*d. Benzoic acid
e. Butyric acid
2869. What carboxylic acid is an aromatic monocarboxylic acid and can be used in treatment of skin diseases as an external antiseptic and fungicide?
a. Valeric acid
b. Butyric acid
*c. Benzoic acid
d. Formic acid
e. Acetic acid
2870. What cation can be detected with Chugaiev's agent (Dimethylglyoxime)?
a. Ca^2+
b. Co^2+
*c. Ni^2+
d. К^+
e. Mn^2+
2871. What cation can be detected with Chugaiev's agent (Dimethylglyoxime)?
a. К^+
*b. Ni^2+
c. Mn^2+
d. Co^2+
e. Ca^2+
2872. What cation can be detected with Chugaiev's agent (Dimethylglyoxime)?
a. К^+
b. Ca^2+
c. Co^2+
d. Mn^2+
*e. Ni^2+
2873. What cation is present in the solution, if its heating with an alkali produces a gas with pungent odor?
a. Lead(ІІ)
b. Mercury(I)
c. Mercury(II)
*d. Ammonium
e. Silver(І)
2874. What cation is present in the solution, if its heating with an alkali produces a gas with pungent odor?
a. Mercury(I)
b. Mercury(II)
c. Silver(І)
d. Lead(ІІ)
*e. Ammonium
2875. What cation is present in the solution, if its heating with an alkali produces a gas with pungent odor?
a. Silver(І)
b. Lead(ІІ)
c. Mercury(II)
d. Mercury(I)
*e. Ammonium
2876. What cation of the V analytical group (acid-base classification) is present in the solution, if a black precipitate is produced when tin(II) chloride dissolved in an alkaline medium is added into this solution?
*a. Bismuth(III)
b. Iron(III)
c. Antimony(III)
d. Iron(II)
e. Manganese(II)
2877. What cation of the V analytical group (acid-base classification) is present in the solution, if a black precipitate is produced when tin(II) chloride dissolved in an alkaline medium is added into this solution?
a. Antimony(III)
*b. Bismuth(III)
c. Iron(III)
d. Manganese(II)
e. Iron(II)
2878. What cation of the V analytical group (acid-base classification) is present in the solution, if a black precipitate is produced when tin(II) chloride dissolved in an alkaline medium is added into this solution?
a. Iron(II)
b. Antimony(III)
c. Manganese(II)
d. Iron(III)
*e. Bismuth(III)
2879. What cations have the highest mobility among those listed below?
a. Ammonium cations
b. Lithium cations
c. Sodium cations
d. Potassium cations
*e. Hydroxonium cations
2880. What cations have the highest mobility among those listed below?
a. Lithium cations
b. Ammonium cations
c. Potassium cations
d. Sodium cations
*e. Hydroxonium cations
2881. What cations have the highest mobility among those listed below?
a. Potassium cations
*b. Hydroxonium cations
c. Sodium cations
d. Lithium cations
e. Ammonium cations
2882. What cations of the fifth analytical group (acid-base classification) form colored hydroxides when precipitated with a group reagent?
a. Ag^+, Al^3+
b. Ca^2+, Ba^2+
c. Sn^2+, Sr^2+
*d. Fe^2+, Fe^3+
e. Na^+, K^+
2883. What cations of the fifth analytical group (acid-base classification) form colored hydroxides when precipitated with a group reagent?
a. Ca^2+, Ba^2+
b. Ag^+, Al^3+
c. Na^+, K^+
d. Sn^2+, Sr^2+
*e. Fe^2+, Fe^3+
2884. What cations of the fifth analytical group (acid-base classification) form colored hydroxides when precipitated with a group reagent?
a. Ca^2+, Ba^2+
b. Sn^2+, Sr^2+
c. Ag^+, Al^3+
d. Na^+, K^+
*e. Fe^2+, Fe^3+
2885. What causes the dry cough that developed in a patient who has been taking lisinopril for a long time to treat her essential hypertension?
a. Accumulation of angiotensin II
b. Inhibition of angiotensin receptors
*c. Increased bradykinin levels
d. Depletion of the noradrenaline reserves
e. Decreased renin levels
2886. What causes the dry cough that developed in a patient who has been taking lisinopril for a long time to treat her essential hypertension?
a. Decreased renin levels
b. Inhibition of angiotensin receptors
c. Depletion of the noradrenaline reserves
d. Accumulation of angiotensin II
*e. Increased bradykinin levels
2887. What causes the dry cough that developed in a patient who has been taking lisinopril for a long time to treat her essential hypertension?
a. Depletion of the noradrenaline reserves
b. Accumulation of angiotensin II
c. Inhibition of angiotensin receptors
d. Decreased renin levels
*e. Increased bradykinin levels
2888. What changes occur with the entropy of an isolated system, when it spontaneously approaches the equilibrium state?
*a. Reaches its maximum
b. Does not change
c. Decreases linearly
d. Tends to infinity
e. Reaches its minimum
2889. What changes occur with the entropy of an isolated system, when it spontaneously approaches the equilibrium state?
a. Does not change
*b. Reaches its maximum
c. Decreases linearly
d. Reaches its minimum
e. Tends to infinity
2890. What changes occur with the entropy of an isolated system, when it spontaneously approaches the equilibrium state?
a. Reaches its minimum
b. Decreases linearly
c. Does not change
*d. Reaches its maximum
e. Tends to infinity
2891. What characteristic is used in titrimetric methods of analysis, when choosing the indicator?
*a. Transition interval
b. Neutralization point
c. Titration jump
d. Indicator constant
e. Titration index
2892. What characteristic is used in titrimetric methods of analysis, when choosing the indicator?
a. Neutralization point
b. Titration index
c. Titration jump
d. Indicator constant
*e. Transition interval
2893. What characteristic is used in titrimetric methods of analysis, when choosing the indicator?
a. Titration index
b. Indicator constant
c. Neutralization point
d. Titration jump
*e. Transition interval
2894. What characteristic is used to choose indicator for titration analysis?
*a. Transition interval
b. Indicator constant
c. Titration curve jump
d. Equivalence point
e. Titration indicator
2895. What characteristic is used to choose indicator for titration analysis?
*a. Transition interval
b. Titration curve jump
c. Equivalence point
d. Indicator constant
e. Titration indicator
2896. What characteristic is used to choose indicator for titration analysis?
a. Titration indicator
b. Titration curve jump
c. Equivalence point
d. Indicator constant
*e. Transition interval
2897. What chemotherapeutic agent is a drug of choice for treatment of herpes?
*a. Acyclovir
b. Chingamin
c. Metronidazole
d. Rifampicin
e. Doxycycline hydrochloride
2898. What chemotherapeutic agent is a drug of choice for treatment of herpes?
a. Chingamin
b. Doxycycline hydrochloride
*c. Acyclovir
d. Metronidazole
e. Rifampicin
2899. What chemotherapeutic agent is a drug of choice for treatment of herpes?
a. Metronidazole
b. Rifampicin
c. Doxycycline hydrochloride
d. Chingamin
*e. Acyclovir
2900. What component of a plant cell determines the water content in the plant's internal environment, regulates water-salt metabolism, maintains turgor, and accumulates substances?
a. Chloroplasts
b. Endoplasmic reticulum
c. Mitochondria
d. Golgi complex
*e. Vacuoles
2901. What component of a plant cell determines the water content in the plant's internal environment, regulates water-salt metabolism, maintains turgor, and accumulates substances?
a. Endoplasmic reticulum
b. Chloroplasts
c. Golgi complex
d. Mitochondria
*e. Vacuoles
2902. What component of a plant cell determines the water content in the plant's internal environment, regulates water-salt metabolism, maintains turgor, and accumulates substances?
a. Mitochondria
b. Endoplasmic reticulum
c. Golgi complex
*d. Vacuoles
e. Chloroplasts
2903. What compound can be classified as a condensed arene?
*a. Naphthalene
b. Diphenylmethane
c. Biphenyl
d. Triphenylmethane
e. Benzene
2904. What compound can be classified as a condensed arene?
a. Diphenylmethane
*b. Naphthalene
c. Triphenylmethane
d. Benzene
e. Biphenyl
2905. What compound can be classified as a condensed arene?
a. Triphenylmethane
b. Benzene
*c. Naphthalene
d. Biphenyl
e. Diphenylmethane
2906. What compound has no carboxyl group but nevertheless is called an acid?
a. Malic acid
b. Valeric acid
c. Tartaric acid
*d. Picric acid
e. Lactic acid
2907. What compound has no carboxyl group but nevertheless is called an acid?
a. Tartaric acid
b. Valeric acid
c. Lactic acid
d. Malic acid
*e. Picric acid
2908. What compound has no carboxyl group but nevertheless is called an acid?
a. Valeric acid
b. Malic acid
c. Lactic acid
d. Tartaric acid
*e. Picric acid
2909. What compound is added along with the murexide indicator to reach рН>12, when detecting calcium cations?
a. Acetate buffer
*b. Sodium hydroxide
c. Ammonium hydroxide
d. Urotropin
e. Ammoniac buffer
2910. What compound is added along with the murexide indicator to reach рН>12, when detecting calcium cations?
a. Urotropin
*b. Sodium hydroxide
c. Ammoniac buffer
d. Ammonium hydroxide
e. Acetate buffer
2911. What compound is added along with the murexide indicator to reach рН>12, when detecting calcium cations?
a. Urotropin
b. Acetate buffer
c. Ammoniac buffer
*d. Sodium hydroxide
e. Ammonium hydroxide
2912. What compound is formed as a result of interaction between aniline and concentrated sulfuric acid in a high-boiling solvent and is a structural fragment of a large group of medicines?
a. Methylamine
b. Uric acid
*c. Sulfanilic acid
d. Salicylic acid
e. Gamma-aminobutyric acid
2913. What compound is formed as a result of interaction between aniline and concentrated sulfuric acid in a high-boiling solvent and is a structural fragment of a large group of medicines?
a. Uric acid
b. Methylamine
c. Gamma-aminobutyric acid
*d. Sulfanilic acid
e. Salicylic acid
2914. What compound is formed as a result of interaction between aniline and concentrated sulfuric acid in a high-boiling solvent and is a structural fragment of a large group of medicines?
a. Uric acid
b. Salicylic acid
c. Methylamine
*d. Sulfanilic acid
e. Gamma-aminobutyric acid
2915. What compound is obtained as the result of propylene interacting with bromine CH_3-CH=CH_2 + Br_2longrightarrow?
a. -
b. 1,1-Dibromopropane
*c. 1,2-Dibromopropane
d. 1,2-Dibromopropene
e. 1,3-Dibromopropane
2916. What compound is obtained as the result of propylene interacting with bromine CH_3-CH=CH_2 + Br_2longrightarrow?
a. 1,1-Dibromopropane
b. 1,2-Dibromopropene
*c. 1,2-Dibromopropane
d. -
e. 1,3-Dibromopropane
2917. What compound is obtained as the result of propylene interacting with bromine CH_3-CH=CH_2 + Br_2longrightarrow?
a. 1,2-Dibromopropene
*b. 1,2-Dibromopropane
c. 1,3-Dibromopropane
d. 1,1-Dibromopropane
e. -
2918. What compound will react with propane under the given conditions?
a. Cl_2, FeCl_3
b. CH_3COONO_2
c. H_2SO_4 concentrated
d. HNO_3 concentrated
*e. Br_2, hnu, 20^oC
2919. What compound will react with propane under the given conditions?
a. HNO_3 concentrated
*b. Br_2, hnu, 20^oC
c. Cl_2, FeCl_3
d. CH_3COONO_2
e. H_2SO_4 concentrated
2920. What compound will react with propane under the given conditions?
a. HNO_3 concentrated
b. Cl_2, FeCl_3
c. CH_3COONO_2
*d. Br_2, hnu, 20^oC
e. H_2SO_4 concentrated
2921. What conditions are necessary for the formation of crystalline precipitates?
*a. Slow precipitation in hot dilute solutions
b. Slow precipitation in cold concentrated solutions
c. Rapid precipitation in hot dilute solutions
d. Slow precipitation in cold dilute solutions
e. Rapid precipitation in hot concentrated solutions
2922. What conditions are necessary for the formation of crystalline precipitates?
a. Rapid precipitation in hot concentrated solutions
b. Rapid precipitation in hot dilute solutions
c. Slow precipitation in cold concentrated solutions
d. Slow precipitation in cold dilute solutions
*e. Slow precipitation in hot dilute solutions
2923. What conditions are necessary for the formation of crystalline precipitates?
a. Rapid precipitation in hot dilute solutions
b. Rapid precipitation in hot concentrated solutions
*c. Slow precipitation in hot dilute solutions
d. Slow precipitation in cold concentrated solutions
e. Slow precipitation in cold dilute solutions
2924. What coordinates are used to build monomolecular adsorption isotherms?
a. Inverse adsorption - concentration
b. Logarithm of adsorption - concentration
*c. Adsorption - concentration
d. Surface tension - concentration
e. Inverse adsorption - inverse concentration
2925. What coordinates are used to build monomolecular adsorption isotherms?
a. Inverse adsorption - concentration
b. Logarithm of adsorption - concentration
c. Inverse adsorption - inverse concentration
d. Surface tension - concentration
*e. Adsorption - concentration
2926. What coordinates are used to build monomolecular adsorption isotherms?
a. Logarithm of adsorption - concentration
b. Inverse adsorption - concentration
c. Surface tension - concentration
*d. Adsorption - concentration
e. Inverse adsorption - inverse concentration
2927. What device is used to measure surface tension of a liquid?
a. Areometer
*b. Stalagmometer
c. Viscometer
d. Nephelometer
e. Calorimeter
2928. What device is used to measure surface tension of a liquid?
a. Areometer
b. Nephelometer
*c. Stalagmometer
d. Viscometer
e. Calorimeter
2929. What device is used to measure surface tension of a liquid?
a. Nephelometer
*b. Stalagmometer
c. Viscometer
d. Calorimeter
e. Areometer
2930. What disaccharide is a reducing one?
*a. Maltose
b. Starch
c. Sucrose
d. Cellulose
e. Ribose
2931. What disaccharide is a reducing one?
a. Ribose
*b. Maltose
c. Cellulose
d. Sucrose
e. Starch
2932. What disaccharide is a reducing one?
a. Starch
b. Sucrose
c. Ribose
*d. Maltose
e. Cellulose
2933. What disperse system can be classified as liquid-liquid based on its aggregate state?
a. Activated carbon
b. Lather
c. Fog
*d. Milk
e. Smoke
2934. What disperse system can be classified as liquid-liquid based on its aggregate state?
a. Activated carbon
b. Lather
c. Fog
d. Smoke
*e. Milk
2935. What disperse system can be classified as liquid-liquid based on its aggregate state?
a. Lather
*b. Milk
c. Smoke
d. Activated carbon
e. Fog
2936. What diuretic reduces excretion of uric acid?
*a. Hydrochlorothiazide
b. Mannitol
c. Acetazolamide
d. Verospiron (Spironolactone)
e. Furosemide
2937. What diuretic reduces excretion of uric acid?
a. Furosemide
b. Mannitol
*c. Hydrochlorothiazide
d. Acetazolamide
e. Verospiron (Spironolactone)
2938. What diuretic reduces excretion of uric acid?
a. Mannitol
b. Acetazolamide
*c. Hydrochlorothiazide
d. Verospiron (Spironolactone)
e. Furosemide
2939. What drug can be classified as an angiotensin-converting enzyme blocker based on its mechanism of action?
a. Benzohexonium
b. Valsartan
c. Verapamil
d. Furosemide
*e. Lisinopril
2940. What drug can be classified as an angiotensin-converting enzyme blocker based on its mechanism of action?
a. Furosemide
b. Valsartan
c. Benzohexonium
d. Verapamil
*e. Lisinopril
2941. What drug can be classified as an angiotensin-converting enzyme blocker based on its mechanism of action?
a. Verapamil
b. Benzohexonium
c. Valsartan
d. Furosemide
*e. Lisinopril
2942. What drug can be used to stop a bronchospasm?
a. Amoxicillin
b. Atenolol
*c. Salbutamol
d. Omnoponum
e. Aspirin
2943. What drug can be used to stop a bronchospasm?
a. Atenolol
b. Aspirin
c. Omnoponum
d. Amoxicillin
*e. Salbutamol
2944. What drug can be used to stop a bronchospasm?
a. Omnoponum
b. Atenolol
*c. Salbutamol
d. Amoxicillin
e. Aspirin
2945. What drug has an anxiolytic and anticonvulsant effect?
*a. Diazepam
b. Phenobarbital
c. Aminazine (Chlorpromazine)
d. Reserpine
e. Droperidol
2946. What drug has an anxiolytic and anticonvulsant effect?
*a. Diazepam
b. Reserpine
c. Aminazine (Chlorpromazine)
d. Droperidol
e. Phenobarbital
2947. What drug has an anxiolytic and anticonvulsant effect?
a. Aminazine (Chlorpromazine)
b. Reserpine
*c. Diazepam
d. Droperidol
e. Phenobarbital
2948. What drug is administered in case of uterine inertia?
*a. Oxytocin
b. No-spa
c. Fenoterol
d. Vikasolum
e. Progesterone
2949. What drug is administered in case of uterine inertia?
a. Fenoterol
b. No-spa
c. Vikasolum
*d. Oxytocin
e. Progesterone
2950. What drug is administered in case of uterine inertia?
a. Progesterone
b. No-spa
*c. Oxytocin
d. Vikasolum
e. Fenoterol
2951. What drug is advisable for individual malaria prophylaxis?
a. Ampicillin
b. Rifampicin
c. Trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (Co-trimoxazole)
d. Gentamicin
*e. Chingamin
2952. What drug is advisable for individual malaria prophylaxis?
a. Gentamicin
b. Trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (Co-trimoxazole)
*c. Chingamin
d. Rifampicin
e. Ampicillin
2953. What drug is advisable for individual malaria prophylaxis?
a. Trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (Co-trimoxazole)
b. Ampicillin
c. Rifampicin
*d. Chingamin
e. Gentamicin
2954. What drug is an H_2-histamine receptor blocker?
*a. Famotidine
b. Almagel
c. Gastrotzepin (Pirenzepine)
d. Allochol
e. Omeprazole
2955. What drug is an H_2-histamine receptor blocker?
a. Allochol
*b. Famotidine
c. Gastrotzepin (Pirenzepine)
d. Almagel
e. Omeprazole
2956. What drug is an H_2-histamine receptor blocker?
a. Gastrotzepin (Pirenzepine)
b. Omeprazole
c. Allochol
*d. Famotidine
e. Almagel
2957. What drug is indicated in case of an overdose of depolarizing muscle relaxants?
a. Magnesium sulfate
b. Naloxone
c. Metoprolol
d. Unithiol
*e. Prozerin (Neostigmine)
2958. What drug is indicated in case of an overdose of depolarizing muscle relaxants?
a. Metoprolol
*b. Prozerin (Neostigmine)
c. Unithiol
d. Naloxone
e. Magnesium sulfate
2959. What drug is indicated in case of an overdose of depolarizing muscle relaxants?
a. Unithiol
b. Metoprolol
*c. Prozerin (Neostigmine)
d. Naloxone
e. Magnesium sulfate
2960. What drug is prescribed for prevention of myocardial infarction, if there are contraindications to acetylsalicylic acid?
*a. Ticlopidine
b. Heparin
c. Phenylin (Phenindione)
d. Streptokinase
e. Neodicoumarin (ethyl biscoumacetate)
2961. What drug is prescribed for prevention of myocardial infarction, if there are contraindications to acetylsalicylic acid?
a. Phenylin (Phenindione)
b. Streptokinase
c. Heparin
*d. Ticlopidine
e. Neodicoumarin (ethyl biscoumacetate)
2962. What drug is prescribed for prevention of myocardial infarction, if there are contraindications to acetylsalicylic acid?
a. Streptokinase
b. Neodicoumarin (ethyl biscoumacetate)
c. Phenylin (Phenindione)
d. Heparin
*e. Ticlopidine
2963. What drug is used as an antidote in cases of overdose with narcotic analgesics?
a. Cordiamine (Nikethamide)
*b. Naloxone
c. Unithiol
d. Ephedrine
e. Atropine
2964. What drug is used as an antidote in cases of overdose with narcotic analgesics?
a. Cordiamine (Nikethamide)
b. Atropine
*c. Naloxone
d. Unithiol
e. Ephedrine
2965. What drug is used as an antidote in cases of overdose with narcotic analgesics?
a. Cordiamine (Nikethamide)
b. Unithiol
*c. Naloxone
d. Ephedrine
e. Atropine
2966. What drug must be prescribed to treat a patient with malaria?
*a. Chingamine (Chloroquine)
b. Tetracycline
c. Chloramine
d. Sulfamethoxazole
e. Ceftriaxone
2967. What drug must be prescribed to treat a patient with malaria?
a. Ceftriaxone
*b. Chingamine (Chloroquine)
c. Sulfamethoxazole
d. Tetracycline
e. Chloramine
2968. What drug must be prescribed to treat a patient with malaria?
a. Sulfamethoxazole
b. Chloramine
c. Tetracycline
*d. Chingamine (Chloroquine)
e. Ceftriaxone
2969. What drug selectively suppresses the secretion of the gastric glands by blocking H_2-histamine receptors?
a. Atropine sulfate
b. Omeprazole
*c. Famotidine
d. Ipratropium bromide
e. Loratadine
2970. What drug selectively suppresses the secretion of the gastric glands by blocking H_2-histamine receptors?
a. Ipratropium bromide
*b. Famotidine
c. Atropine sulfate
d. Loratadine
e. Omeprazole
2971. What drug selectively suppresses the secretion of the gastric glands by blocking H_2-histamine receptors?
a. Ipratropium bromide
b. Omeprazole
*c. Famotidine
d. Loratadine
e. Atropine sulfate
2972. What drug should a doctor choose for substitution therapy after surgical removal of thyroid gland?
a. Insulin
b. Mercazolil (Thiamazole)
c. Prednisolone
*d. L-thyroxine
e. Parathyreoidine
2973. What drug should a doctor choose for substitution therapy after surgical removal of thyroid gland?
a. Mercazolil (Thiamazole)
*b. L-thyroxine
c. Insulin
d. Parathyreoidine
e. Prednisolone
2974. What drug should a doctor choose for substitution therapy after surgical removal of thyroid gland?
a. Parathyreoidine
*b. L-thyroxine
c. Mercazolil (Thiamazole)
d. Prednisolone
e. Insulin
2975. What drug should be administered for individual prevention of malaria?
a. Ampicillin
b. Gentamicin
c. Biseptol (Co-Trimoxazole)
d. Rifampicin
*e. Chingamin
2976. What drug should be administered for individual prevention of malaria?
a. Ampicillin
b. Gentamicin
c. Rifampicin
*d. Chingamin
e. Biseptol (Co-Trimoxazole)
2977. What drug should be administered for individual prevention of malaria?
a. Gentamicin
b. Ampicillin
c. Rifampicin
d. Biseptol (Co-Trimoxazole)
*e. Chingamin
2978. What drug should be prescribed to inhibit the synthesis of thyroid hormones?
a. Antistrumin (potassium iodide)
*b. Mercazolil (Thiamazole)
c. Thyroidin
d. L-thyroxine
e. Parathyroidin
2979. What drug should be prescribed to inhibit the synthesis of thyroid hormones?
a. Parathyroidin
b. L-thyroxine
*c. Mercazolil (Thiamazole)
d. Thyroidin
e. Antistrumin (potassium iodide)
2980. What drug should be prescribed to inhibit the synthesis of thyroid hormones?
a. Thyroidin
b. L-thyroxine
c. Parathyroidin
d. Antistrumin (potassium iodide)
*e. Mercazolil (Thiamazole)
2981. What electrochemical method of quantitative analysis is based on measuring the amount of electric current that has been used for electrochemical reduction or oxidation of ions or elements that are being determined in the process of electrolysis?
a. Conductometry
*b. Coulometry
c. Potentiometry
d. Amperometry
e. Polarography
2982. What electrochemical method of quantitative analysis is based on measuring the amount of electric current that has been used for electrochemical reduction or oxidation of ions or elements that are being determined in the process of electrolysis?
a. Polarography
b. Amperometry
c. Potentiometry
*d. Coulometry
e. Conductometry
2983. What electrochemical method of quantitative analysis is based on measuring the amount of electric current that has been used for electrochemical reduction or oxidation of ions or elements that are being determined in the process of electrolysis?
a. Potentiometry
*b. Coulometry
c. Polarography
d. Conductometry
e. Amperometry
2984. What electrophilic reagent is used for sulfonation of pyrrole and furan?
*a. Pyridine-sulfur trioxide complex
b. Mixture of sulfuric acid and nitric acid
c. Diluted sulfuric acid
d. Concentrated sulfuric acid
e. Oleum
2985. What electrophilic reagent is used for sulfonation of pyrrole and furan?
a. Concentrated sulfuric acid
b. Mixture of sulfuric acid and nitric acid
*c. Pyridine-sulfur trioxide complex
d. Diluted sulfuric acid
e. Oleum
2986. What electrophilic reagent is used for sulfonation of pyrrole and furan?
a. Mixture of sulfuric acid and nitric acid
b. Oleum
c. Diluted sulfuric acid
d. Concentrated sulfuric acid
*e. Pyridine-sulfur trioxide complex
2987. What emulsions can be stabilized by emulsifiers, if the solubility of these emulsifiers is higher in water than in oil?
a. Concentrated emulsions
*b. Direct emulsions
c. Emulsions of the second type
d. Invert emulsions
e. Dilute emulsions
2988. What emulsions can be stabilized by emulsifiers, if the solubility of these emulsifiers is higher in water than in oil?
a. Invert emulsions
*b. Direct emulsions
c. Concentrated emulsions
d. Emulsions of the second type
e. Dilute emulsions
2989. What emulsions can be stabilized by emulsifiers, if the solubility of these emulsifiers is higher in water than in oil?
a. Invert emulsions
b. Dilute emulsions
*c. Direct emulsions
d. Emulsions of the second type
e. Concentrated emulsions
2990. What enzyme catalyzes the reaction of activation of amino acids and their attachment to a specific tRNA?
a. DNA ligase
b. Deoxyribonuclease
c. Ribonuclease
d. Nucleotidase
*e. Aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase
2991. What enzyme catalyzes the reaction of activation of amino acids and their attachment to a specific tRNA?
a. DNA ligase
b. Ribonuclease
*c. Aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase
d. Nucleotidase
e. Deoxyribonuclease
2992. What enzyme catalyzes the reaction of activation of amino acids and their attachment to a specific tRNA?
a. Deoxyribonuclease
b. Nucleotidase
*c. Aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase
d. DNA ligase
e. Ribonuclease
2993. What factor of those named below is leading in developing symptom group characteristic of altitude sickness?
*a. Decrease of oxygen partial pressure in air
b. Solar radiation
c. Speed of ascent
d. Heavy physical exertion
e. Daytime and nighttime temperature difference
2994. What factor of those named below is leading in developing symptom group characteristic of altitude sickness?
a. Heavy physical exertion
*b. Decrease of oxygen partial pressure in air
c. Solar radiation
d. Daytime and nighttime temperature difference
e. Speed of ascent
2995. What factor of those named below is leading in developing symptom group characteristic of altitude sickness?
a. Solar radiation
b. Speed of ascent
*c. Decrease of oxygen partial pressure in air
d. Heavy physical exertion
e. Daytime and nighttime temperature difference
2996. What factor will cause an increase in glomerular filtration in the kidneys?
a. Increased oncotic blood pressure
b. Increased intra-renal pressure
c. Reduced number of functioning glomeruli
*d. Reduced oncotic blood pressure
e. Reduced hydrostatic pressure in the glomerular capillaries
2997. What factor will cause an increase in glomerular filtration in the kidneys?
a. Increased oncotic blood pressure
b. Reduced hydrostatic pressure in the glomerular capillaries
c. Reduced number of functioning glomeruli
d. Increased intra-renal pressure
*e. Reduced oncotic blood pressure
2998. What factor will cause an increase in glomerular filtration in the kidneys?
a. Reduced number of functioning glomeruli
b. Increased intra-renal pressure
*c. Reduced oncotic blood pressure
d. Increased oncotic blood pressure
e. Reduced hydrostatic pressure in the glomerular capillaries
2999. What feature of a leaf is characteristic of Poaceae?
*a. Leaf sheath
b. Stipules
c. Petiole
d. Ochrea
e. Leaf blade
3000. What feature of a leaf is characteristic of Poaceae?
a. Ochrea
*b. Leaf sheath
c. Stipules
d. Leaf blade
e. Petiole
3001. What feature of a leaf is characteristic of Poaceae?
a. Petiole
b. Stipules
c. Ochrea
d. Leaf blade
*e. Leaf sheath
3002. What forms of erythrocytes will be observed in a case of B_12 deficiency anemia?
*a. Megalocytes
b. Annulocytes (Codocytes)
c. Ovalocytes
d. Normocytes
e. Microcytes
3003. What forms of erythrocytes will be observed in a case of B_12 deficiency anemia?
a. Normocytes
b. Microcytes
c. Ovalocytes
*d. Megalocytes
e. Annulocytes (Codocytes)
3004. What forms of erythrocytes will be observed in a case of B_12 deficiency anemia?
a. Normocytes
b. Ovalocytes
*c. Megalocytes
d. Annulocytes (Codocytes)
e. Microcytes
3005. What forms when gelatin dissolves in water at an elevated temperature?
a. Brittle xerogel
b. Emulsion
c. Elastic xerogel
d. Suspension
*e. Molecular solution
3006. What forms when gelatin dissolves in water at an elevated temperature?
a. Elastic xerogel
*b. Molecular solution
c. Suspension
d. Emulsion
e. Brittle xerogel
3007. What forms when gelatin dissolves in water at an elevated temperature?
a. Elastic xerogel
b. Suspension
c. Brittle xerogel
*d. Molecular solution
e. Emulsion
3008. What fruits are apocarpous?
a. Cremocarp, disk-shaped schizocarp
b. Bean, single nutlet
*c. Aggregate drupe, follicetum
d. Apple, acorn
e. Capsule, berry
3009. What fruits are apocarpous?
a. Cremocarp, disk-shaped schizocarp
b. Bean, single nutlet
*c. Aggregate drupe, follicetum
d. Capsule, berry
e. Apple, acorn
3010. What fruits are apocarpous?
a. Cremocarp, disk-shaped schizocarp
b. Bean, single nutlet
c. Capsule, berry
*d. Aggregate drupe, follicetum
e. Apple, acorn
3011. What geometrical shape does methane molecule have?
a. Planar
*b. Tetrahedral
c. Triangular
d. Linear
e. Spherical
3012. What geometrical shape does methane molecule have?
a. Spherical
b. Planar
c. Triangular
*d. Tetrahedral
e. Linear
3013. What geometrical shape does methane molecule have?
a. Triangular
*b. Tetrahedral
c. Planar
d. Linear
e. Spherical
3014. What group of diuretics completely rules out simultaneous prescription of hypotensive drugs that are ingibitors of angiotensin converting enzyme?
*a. Potassium-sparing
b. Xanthine
c. Osmotic
d. Loop
e. Thiazide
3015. What group of diuretics completely rules out simultaneous prescription of hypotensive drugs that are ingibitors of angiotensin converting enzyme?
a. Osmotic
b. Loop
c. Thiazide
d. Xanthine
*e. Potassium-sparing
3016. What group of diuretics completely rules out simultaneous prescription of hypotensive drugs that are ingibitors of angiotensin converting enzyme?
a. Thiazide
b. Xanthine
c. Loop
*d. Potassium-sparing
e. Osmotic
3017. What groups of antibiotics can be classified as beta-lactam antibiotics?
a. Cephalosporins, monobactams, aminoglycosides
b. Penicillins, cephalosporins, tetracyclines
c. Penicillins, cephalosporins, macrolides, carbapenems
*d. Penicillins, cephalosporins, monobactams, carbapenems
e. Cephalosporins, macrolides, aminoglycosides
3018. What groups of antibiotics can be classified as beta-lactam antibiotics?
a. Penicillins, cephalosporins, macrolides, carbapenems
*b. Penicillins, cephalosporins, monobactams, carbapenems
c. Cephalosporins, monobactams, aminoglycosides
d. Cephalosporins, macrolides, aminoglycosides
e. Penicillins, cephalosporins, tetracyclines
3019. What groups of antibiotics can be classified as beta-lactam antibiotics?
a. Penicillins, cephalosporins, tetracyclines
b. Cephalosporins, macrolides, aminoglycosides
*c. Penicillins, cephalosporins, monobactams, carbapenems
d. Cephalosporins, monobactams, aminoglycosides
e. Penicillins, cephalosporins, macrolides, carbapenems
3020. What has an effect on the coagulating action of a coagulant ion, according to the Schulze-Hardy rule?
*a. Ion charge
b. Ion size
c. Adsorbability
d. Polarization
e. Hydration ability
3021. What has an effect on the coagulating action of a coagulant ion, according to the Schulze-Hardy rule?
a. Hydration ability
*b. Ion charge
c. Adsorbability
d. Polarization
e. Ion size
3022. What has an effect on the coagulating action of a coagulant ion, according to the Schulze-Hardy rule?
a. Polarization
*b. Ion charge
c. Ion size
d. Adsorbability
e. Hydration ability
3023. What heterocycle has acidophobic properties?
a. Pteridine
*b. Pyrrole
c. Pyrimidine
d. Thiophene
e. Quinoline
3024. What heterocycle has acidophobic properties?
a. Pteridine
b. Pyrimidine
*c. Pyrrole
d. Thiophene
e. Quinoline
3025. What heterocycle has acidophobic properties?
a. Quinoline
b. Pteridine
c. Thiophene
d. Pyrimidine
*e. Pyrrole
3026. What hormone can cause hypernatremia and hypokalemia, if its secretion becomes increased?
a. Atrial natriuretic hormone (peptide)
*b. Aldosterone
c. Adrenaline
d. Glucagon
e. Parathormone
3027. What hormone can cause hypernatremia and hypokalemia, if its secretion becomes increased?
a. Atrial natriuretic hormone (peptide)
*b. Aldosterone
c. Parathormone
d. Adrenaline
e. Glucagon
3028. What hormone can cause hypernatremia and hypokalemia, if its secretion becomes increased?
a. Parathormone
b. Adrenaline
*c. Aldosterone
d. Atrial natriuretic hormone (peptide)
e. Glucagon
3029. What hormone can provoke an increase in blood pressure and elevated blood levels of glucose and lipids in a patient with hypotension, who has taken it as a component of a drug?
a. Insulin
b. Folliculin
*c. Adrenaline
d. Progesterone
e. Testosterone
3030. What hormone can provoke an increase in blood pressure and elevated blood levels of glucose and lipids in a patient with hypotension, who has taken it as a component of a drug?
a. Progesterone
b. Insulin
c. Testosterone
*d. Adrenaline
e. Folliculin
3031. What hormone can provoke an increase in blood pressure and elevated blood levels of glucose and lipids in a patient with hypotension, who has taken it as a component of a drug?
a. Testosterone
*b. Adrenaline
c. Folliculin
d. Progesterone
e. Insulin
3032. What hormone changes glucose levels in the blood and is produced in the pancreas?
*a. Insulin
b. Aldosterone
c. Growth hormone
d. Testosterone
e. Somatostatin
3033. What hormone changes glucose levels in the blood and is produced in the pancreas?
a. Aldosterone
*b. Insulin
c. Testosterone
d. Somatostatin
e. Growth hormone
3034. What hormone changes glucose levels in the blood and is produced in the pancreas?
a. Aldosterone
b. Testosterone
c. Growth hormone
*d. Insulin
e. Somatostatin
3035. What indicator is used for the quantitative determination of sodium carbonate in a preparation by the method of acid-base titration?
a. Methylene blue
b. Diphenylamine
c. Murexide
*d. Methyl orange
e. Ferroin
3036. What indicator is used for the quantitative determination of sodium carbonate in a preparation by the method of acid-base titration?
a. Murexide
b. Diphenylamine
c. Ferroin
*d. Methyl orange
e. Methylene blue
3037. What indicator is used in determination of primary aromatic amines using the nitritometric method?
a. Phenolphthalein
*b. Tropeolin 00
c. Potassium chromate
d. Methyl orange
e. Eosin
3038. What indicator is used in determination of primary aromatic amines using the nitritometric method?
a. Phenolphthalein
b. Potassium chromate
c. Eosin
*d. Tropeolin 00
e. Methyl orange
3039. What indicator is used in determination of primary aromatic amines using the nitritometric method?
a. Potassium chromate
b. Methyl orange
c. Eosin
d. Phenolphthalein
*e. Tropeolin 00
3040. What indicator is used in the Fajans-Khodakov method to determine sodium iodide (NaI)?
*a. Eosin
b. Potassium chromate
c. Ammonium iron(III) sulfate
d. Diphenylcarbazone
e. Methyl orange
3041. What indicator is used in the Fajans-Khodakov method to determine sodium iodide (NaI)?
a. Ammonium iron(III) sulfate
*b. Eosin
c. Potassium chromate
d. Diphenylcarbazone
e. Methyl orange
3042. What indicator is used in the Fajans-Khodakov method to determine sodium iodide (NaI)?
a. Methyl orange
*b. Eosin
c. Diphenylcarbazone
d. Ammonium iron(III) sulfate
e. Potassium chromate
3043. What indicator should be chosen for standardization of a hydrochloric acid solution using Na_2CO_3 and Na_2B_4O_7 solutions?
*a. Methyl red
b. Murexide
c. Thymol blue
d. Eosin
e. Tropeolin 00
3044. What indicator should be chosen for standardization of a hydrochloric acid solution using Na_2CO_3 and Na_2B_4O_7 solutions?
a. Eosin
b. Murexide
*c. Methyl red
d. Thymol blue
e. Tropeolin 00
3045. What indicator should be chosen for standardization of a hydrochloric acid solution using Na_2CO_3 and Na_2B_4O_7 solutions?
a. Murexide
b. Thymol blue
*c. Methyl red
d. Eosin
e. Tropeolin 00
3046. What indicators are used to determine the titration endpoint in the acid-base titration method?
a. Luminescent indicators
b. Metal indicators
c. Redox indicators
*d. pH indicators
e. Adsorption indicators
3047. What indicators are used to determine the titration endpoint in the acid-base titration method?
a. Metal indicators
b. Adsorption indicators
c. Redox indicators
d. Luminescent indicators
*e. pH indicators
3048. What indicators are used to determine the titration endpoint in the acid-base titration method?
a. Redox indicators
*b. pH indicators
c. Metal indicators
d. Adsorption indicators
e. Luminescent indicators
3049. What inflammatory mediator contributes to an increase in body temperature?
a. Serotonin
*b. Interleukin-1
c. Bradykinin
d. Histamine
e. Thromboxane
3050. What inflammatory mediator contributes to an increase in body temperature?
a. Serotonin
b. Bradykinin
c. Thromboxane
*d. Interleukin-1
e. Histamine
3051. What inflammatory mediator contributes to an increase in body temperature?
a. Thromboxane
b. Histamine
c. Bradykinin
*d. Interleukin-1
e. Serotonin
3052. What integumentary tissue of roots consists of cells with thin cellulose membranes and outgrowths  -  root hairs?
a. Periderm
b. Periblem
*c. Rhizoderm (epiblem)
d. Pleroma
e. Phelloderm
3053. What integumentary tissue of roots consists of cells with thin cellulose membranes and outgrowths  -  root hairs?
a. Phelloderm
b. Pleroma
c. Periderm
d. Periblem
*e. Rhizoderm (epiblem)
3054. What ion has the maximum coagulating effect when added into positively charged sols?
a. Cl^-
b. K^+
c. SO_4^2-
*d. PO_4^3-
e. Al^3+
3055. What ion has the maximum coagulating effect when added into positively charged sols?
a. K^+
*b. PO_4^3-
c. Cl^-
d. Al^3+
e. SO_4^2-
3056. What ion has the maximum coagulating effect when added into positively charged sols?
a. K^+
b. SO_4^2-
*c. PO_4^3-
d. Cl^-
e. Al^3+
3057. What ion increases osmotic pressure in the focus of inflammation?
*a. Potassium
b. Chlorine
c. Magnesium
d. Fluorine
e. Calcium
3058. What ion increases osmotic pressure in the focus of inflammation?
a. Calcium
b. Fluorine
c. Magnesium
*d. Potassium
e. Chlorine
3059. What ion increases osmotic pressure in the focus of inflammation?
a. Fluorine
b. Calcium
c. Chlorine
d. Magnesium
*e. Potassium
3060. What is represented by such a pharmacokinetic value of a drug as its biological half-life (T1/2)?
*a. Time period in which plasma drug concentration decreases by 50%
b. Correlation between the drug clearance rate and plasma drug concentration
c. Blood plasma volume cleared of drug within a time unit
d. Period of total body clearance
e. Renal clearance rate
3061. What is represented by such a pharmacokinetic value of a drug as its biological half-life (T1/2)?
*a. Time period in which plasma drug concentration decreases by 50%
b. Correlation between the drug clearance rate and plasma drug concentration
c. Period of total body clearance
d. Renal clearance rate
e. Blood plasma volume cleared of drug within a time unit
3062. What is represented by such a pharmacokinetic value of a drug as its biological half-life (T1/2)?
a. Correlation between the drug clearance rate and plasma drug concentration
b. Renal clearance rate
c. Blood plasma volume cleared of drug within a time unit
d. Period of total body clearance
*e. Time period in which plasma drug concentration decreases by 50%
3063. What is the generative reproductive organ of gymnosperms and angiosperms?
*a. Seed
b. Strobilus
c. Macro- and microspores
d. Flower
e. Fruit
3064. What is the generative reproductive organ of gymnosperms and angiosperms?
a. Fruit
b. Strobilus
c. Flower
d. Macro- and microspores
*e. Seed
3065. What is the generative reproductive organ of gymnosperms and angiosperms?
a. Macro- and microspores
b. Fruit
c. Strobilus
d. Flower
*e. Seed
3066. What is the main mechanism of benzylpenicillin bactericidal action on the coccal flora?
*a. Disturbed synthesis of microbial cell wall
b. Disturbed cytoplasmic membrane permeability
c. Inhibition of protein synthesis
d. Activation of macroorganism immune system
e. Increased phagocytic activity of leukocytes
3067. What is the main mechanism of benzylpenicillin bactericidal action on the coccal flora?
*a. Disturbed synthesis of microbial cell wall
b. Inhibition of protein synthesis
c. Increased phagocytic activity of leukocytes
d. Activation of macroorganism immune system
e. Disturbed cytoplasmic membrane permeability
3068. What is the main mechanism of benzylpenicillin bactericidal action on the coccal flora?
a. Activation of macroorganism immune system
*b. Disturbed synthesis of microbial cell wall
c. Increased phagocytic activity of leukocytes
d. Inhibition of protein synthesis
e. Disturbed cytoplasmic membrane permeability
3069. What is the main substrate for eicosanoid synthesis in the human body?
a. Oleic acid
*b. Arachidonic acid
c. Palmitic acid
d. Caproic acid
e. Stearic acid
3070. What is the main substrate for eicosanoid synthesis in the human body?
a. Oleic acid
b. Caproic acid
c. Stearic acid
d. Palmitic acid
*e. Arachidonic acid
3071. What is the main substrate for eicosanoid synthesis in the human body?
a. Palmitic acid
b. Stearic acid
*c. Arachidonic acid
d. Caproic acid
e. Oleic acid
3072. What is the mechanism of Br_2 attaching to propene?
a. A_N
*b. А_Е
c. S_E
d. S_R
e. S_N
3073. What is the mechanism of Br_2 attaching to propene?
a. A_N
*b. А_Е
c. S_R
d. S_E
e. S_N
3074. What is the mechanism of Br_2 attaching to propene?
a. S_R
*b. А_Е
c. A_N
d. S_N
e. S_E
3075. What is the mechanism of action of a catalyst in a chemical reaction?
a. Changes the degree of dispersion
b. Increases activation energy
c. Does not change the activation energy
*d. Reduces activation energy
e. Changes the nature of the reagents
3076. What is the mechanism of action of a catalyst in a chemical reaction?
a. Changes the nature of the reagents
b. Changes the degree of dispersion
c. Increases activation energy
d. Does not change the activation energy
*e. Reduces activation energy
3077. What is the mechanism of action of a catalyst in a chemical reaction?
a. Does not change the activation energy
b. Increases activation energy
c. Changes the nature of the reagents
d. Changes the degree of dispersion
*e. Reduces activation energy
3078. What is the mechanism of action of the antiviral drug acyclovir?
*a. Inhibition of nucleic acid synthesis
b. Blockade of cellular wall synthesis
c. Increase of cellular membrane permeability
d. Antagonism with para-aminobenzoic acid
e. Inhibition of protein synthesis
3079. What is the mechanism of action of the antiviral drug acyclovir?
a. Increase of cellular membrane permeability
*b. Inhibition of nucleic acid synthesis
c. Inhibition of protein synthesis
d. Antagonism with para-aminobenzoic acid
e. Blockade of cellular wall synthesis
3080. What is the mechanism of action of the antiviral drug acyclovir?
a. Increase of cellular membrane permeability
b. Antagonism with para-aminobenzoic acid
c. Inhibition of protein synthesis
*d. Inhibition of nucleic acid synthesis
e. Blockade of cellular wall synthesis
3081. What is the most common side-effect of inhaled corticosteroids?
*a. Oropharyngeal candidiasis
b. Increased body mass
c. Subcapsular cataract
d. Arterial hypertension
e. Osteoporosis
3082. What is the most common side-effect of inhaled corticosteroids?
a. Increased body mass
b. Arterial hypertension
c. Subcapsular cataract
*d. Oropharyngeal candidiasis
e. Osteoporosis
3083. What is the most common side-effect of inhaled corticosteroids?
a. Subcapsular cataract
b. Arterial hypertension
*c. Oropharyngeal candidiasis
d. Osteoporosis
e. Increased body mass
3084. What is the name of an elongated dehiscent fruit formed from a coenocarpous gynoecium and divided by a membranous partition with seeds?
*a. Silique
b. Disk-shaped schizocarp
c. Legume
d. Capsule
e. Cremocarp
3085. What is the name of an elongated dehiscent fruit formed from a coenocarpous gynoecium and divided by a membranous partition with seeds?
a. Disk-shaped schizocarp
b. Legume
c. Cremocarp
d. Capsule
*e. Silique
3086. What is the name of an elongated dehiscent fruit formed from a coenocarpous gynoecium and divided by a membranous partition with seeds?
a. Legume
b. Cremocarp
*c. Silique
d. Disk-shaped schizocarp
e. Capsule
3087. What is the name of the lower expanded hollow part of the pistil of a flower, where ovules are located?
a. Receptacle
b. Stylus
c. Stigma
*d. Ovary
e. Gynoecium
3088. What is the name of the lower expanded hollow part of the pistil of a flower, where ovules are located?
a. Stigma
*b. Ovary
c. Receptacle
d. Stylus
e. Gynoecium
3089. What is the name of the lower expanded hollow part of the pistil of a flower, where ovules are located?
a. Stigma
b. Receptacle
c. Stylus
*d. Ovary
e. Gynoecium
3090. What is the name of the lower expanded hollow part of the pistil that contains ovules in a flower?
*a. Ovary
b. Receptacle
c. Gynoecium
d. Stigma
e. Style
3091. What is the name of the lower expanded hollow part of the pistil that contains ovules in a flower?
a. Receptacle
b. Style
c. Stigma
d. Gynoecium
*e. Ovary
3092. What is the name of the lower expanded hollow part of the pistil that contains ovules in a flower?
a. Stigma
b. Gynoecium
c. Style
*d. Ovary
e. Receptacle
3093. What is the name of the phenomenon when one drug enhances the effect of another?
a. Sensitization
b. Withdrawal
*c. Synergism
d. Antagonism
e. Tachyphylaxis
3094. What is the name of the phenomenon when one drug enhances the effect of another?
a. Tachyphylaxis
b. Sensitization
c. Antagonism
d. Withdrawal
*e. Synergism
3095. What is the name of the phenomenon when one drug enhances the effect of another?
a. Tachyphylaxis
b. Sensitization
c. Withdrawal
d. Antagonism
*e. Synergism
3096. What is the name of the single elongated crystals with pointed ends that can be detected during the microscopy of the herbal raw material harvested from a monocotyledonous plant?
*a. Styloids
b. Druses
c. Globoids
d. Cystoliths
e. Crystalline sand
3097. What is the name of the single elongated crystals with pointed ends that can be detected during the microscopy of the herbal raw material harvested from a monocotyledonous plant?
a. Crystalline sand
b. Cystoliths
c. Druses
*d. Styloids
e. Globoids
3098. What is the name of the single elongated crystals with pointed ends that can be detected during the microscopy of the herbal raw material harvested from a monocotyledonous plant?
a. Cystoliths
*b. Styloids
c. Druses
d. Crystalline sand
e. Globoids
3099. What is the order of the kinetic equation that describes the process of coagulation according to the Smoluchowski theory of rapid coagulation?
*a. Second order
b. Fractional order
c. Third order
d. Zero order
e. First order
3100. What is the order of the kinetic equation that describes the process of coagulation according to the Smoluchowski theory of rapid coagulation?
a. First order
b. Zero order
c. Fractional order
d. Third order
*e. Second order
3101. What is the order of the kinetic equation that describes the process of coagulation according to the Smoluchowski theory of rapid coagulation?
a. Zero order
b. First order
*c. Second order
d. Fractional order
e. Third order
3102. What is the taxonomic division of a plant with periphloematic fibrovascular bundles that were detected during the study of the anatomical structure of its rhizome?
a. Green algae
b. Angiosperms
*c. Polypodiophyta
d. Bryobionta
e. Gymnosperms
3103. What is the taxonomic division of a plant with periphloematic fibrovascular bundles that were detected during the study of the anatomical structure of its rhizome?
a. Green algae
b. Bryobionta
c. Angiosperms
d. Gymnosperms
*e. Polypodiophyta
3104. What is the taxonomic division of a plant with periphloematic fibrovascular bundles that were detected during the study of the anatomical structure of its rhizome?
a. Gymnosperms
b. Bryobionta
c. Angiosperms
d. Green algae
*e. Polypodiophyta
3105. What is the type of leaf attachment to the stem in Papaver somniferum?
*a. Clasping
b. Perfoliate
c. Ochreate
d. Auriculate
e. Sheathing
3106. What is the type of leaf attachment to the stem in Papaver somniferum?
a. Ochreate
*b. Clasping
c. Auriculate
d. Sheathing
e. Perfoliate
3107. What is the type of leaf attachment to the stem in Papaver somniferum?
a. Sheathing
b. Auriculate
*c. Clasping
d. Perfoliate
e. Ochreate
3108. What kind of ground (functional) tissue is characteristic of above-ground organs of succulent plants, Cactaceae in particular?
a. Folded parenchyma
b. Starch storage parenchyma
*c. Hydroparenchyma
d. Aerenchyma
e. Spongy parenchyma
3109. What kind of ground (functional) tissue is characteristic of above-ground organs of succulent plants, Cactaceae in particular?
a. Folded parenchyma
b. Starch storage parenchyma
*c. Hydroparenchyma
d. Spongy parenchyma
e. Aerenchyma
3110. What kind of ground (functional) tissue is characteristic of above-ground organs of succulent plants, Cactaceae in particular?
a. Spongy parenchyma
b. Starch storage parenchyma
c. Aerenchyma
d. Folded parenchyma
*e. Hydroparenchyma
3111. What local anesthetic is given to patients with cardiac rhythm disorder?
*a. Lidocaine
b. Caffeine and sodium benzoate
c. Morphine hydrochloride
d. Paracetamol
e. Nitrazepam
3112. What local anesthetic is given to patients with cardiac rhythm disorder?
a. Caffeine and sodium benzoate
b. Paracetamol
*c. Lidocaine
d. Morphine hydrochloride
e. Nitrazepam
3113. What local anesthetic is given to patients with cardiac rhythm disorder?
a. Nitrazepam
*b. Lidocaine
c. Morphine hydrochloride
d. Caffeine and sodium benzoate
e. Paracetamol
3114. What local anesthetic is used to treat ventricular arrhythmia?
*a. Lidocaine hydrochloride
b. Ropivacaine
c. Anesthesin (Benzocaine)
d. Ultracaine
e. Bupivacaine
3115. What local anesthetic is used to treat ventricular arrhythmia?
a. Anesthesin (Benzocaine)
*b. Lidocaine hydrochloride
c. Ropivacaine
d. Ultracaine
e. Bupivacaine
3116. What local anesthetic is used to treat ventricular arrhythmia?
a. Anesthesin (Benzocaine)
b. Ultracaine
*c. Lidocaine hydrochloride
d. Bupivacaine
e. Ropivacaine
3117. What medicine increases the risk of toxic effects when taken along with gentamicin?
*a. Furosemide
b. Erythromycin
c. Methylprednisolone
d. Caffeine
e. Penicillin
3118. What medicine increases the risk of toxic effects when taken along with gentamicin?
a. Caffeine
b. Methylprednisolone
c. Penicillin
*d. Furosemide
e. Erythromycin
3119. What medicine increases the risk of toxic effects when taken along with gentamicin?
a. Methylprednisolone
b. Erythromycin
c. Caffeine
*d. Furosemide
e. Penicillin
3120. What medicine must be prescribed to a patient diagnosed with rheumatoid arthritis, if this patient's medical history indicates gastritis as a concomitant diagnosis?
a. Diclofenac
b. Ibuprofen
c. Aspirin (acetylsalicylic acid)
d. Indomethacin
*e. Celecoxib
3121. What medicine must be prescribed to a patient diagnosed with rheumatoid arthritis, if this patient's medical history indicates gastritis as a concomitant diagnosis?
a. Ibuprofen
*b. Celecoxib
c. Aspirin (acetylsalicylic acid)
d. Indomethacin
e. Diclofenac
3122. What medicine must be prescribed to a patient diagnosed with rheumatoid arthritis, if this patient's medical history indicates gastritis as a concomitant diagnosis?
a. Ibuprofen
b. Indomethacin
c. Aspirin (acetylsalicylic acid)
d. Diclofenac
*e. Celecoxib
3123. What medium is necessary for determining the halide ions argentometrically using the Volhard method?
a. Neutral medium
b. Strong alkaline medium
c. Weak alkaline medium
*d. Nitric acid medium
e. Acetic acid medium
3124. What medium is necessary for determining the halide ions argentometrically using the Volhard method?
a. Neutral medium
b. Weak alkaline medium
*c. Nitric acid medium
d. Strong alkaline medium
e. Acetic acid medium
3125. What medium is necessary for determining the halide ions argentometrically using the Volhard method?
a. Weak alkaline medium
b. Acetic acid medium
*c. Nitric acid medium
d. Neutral medium
e. Strong alkaline medium
3126. What method can be used to determine the moisture content in thermally unstable preparations?
a. Bromatometric method
b. Nitritometric method
c. Iodometric method
d. Permanganatometric method
*e. Non-aqueous titration using the Fischer's method
3127. What method can be used to determine the moisture content in thermally unstable preparations?
a. Iodometric method
b. Permanganatometric method
c. Nitritometric method
*d. Non-aqueous titration using the Fischer's method
e. Bromatometric method
3128. What method can be used to determine the moisture content in thermally unstable preparations?
a. Nitritometric method
b. Permanganatometric method
c. Bromatometric method
d. Iodometric method
*e. Non-aqueous titration using the Fischer's method
3129. What method is used for quantification of magnesium sulfate solution for injections?
a. Acid-base titration
*b. Complexonometry
c. Iodine monochloride titration
d. Cerimetry
e. Nitritometry
3130. What method is used for quantification of magnesium sulfate solution for injections?
a. Acid-base titration
b. Cerimetry
c. Nitritometry
d. Iodine monochloride titration
*e. Complexonometry
3131. What method is used for quantification of magnesium sulfate solution for injections?
a. Iodine monochloride titration
b. Nitritometry
c. Acid-base titration
*d. Complexonometry
e. Cerimetry
3132. What method is used for simultaneous elimination of the effect of foreign substances, concentration, and determination of concentration?
a. Differential spectrophotometry
b. Refractometry
c. Fluorimetry
*d. Extraction-photometric analysis
e. Polarimetry
3133. What method is used for simultaneous elimination of the effect of foreign substances, concentration, and determination of concentration?
a. Refractometry
b. Differential spectrophotometry
c. Polarimetry
d. Fluorimetry
*e. Extraction-photometric analysis
3134. What method is used for simultaneous elimination of the effect of foreign substances, concentration, and determination of concentration?
a. Refractometry
b. Polarimetry
*c. Extraction-photometric analysis
d. Differential spectrophotometry
e. Fluorimetry
3135. What method is used for the quantification of ammonia?
*a. Alkalimetry, back titration
b. Alkalimetry, direct titration
c. Complexonometry
d. Acidimetry, back titration
e. Acidimetry, direct titration
3136. What method is used for the quantification of ammonia?
a. Acidimetry, back titration
*b. Alkalimetry, back titration
c. Complexonometry
d. Acidimetry, direct titration
e. Alkalimetry, direct titration
3137. What method is used for the quantification of ammonia?
a. Complexonometry
b. Alkalimetry, direct titration
c. Acidimetry, direct titration
*d. Alkalimetry, back titration
e. Acidimetry, back titration
3138. What method is used for the quantification of bismuth in a preparation?
*a. Complexonometry
b. Iodometry
c. Mercurimetry
d. Argentometry
e. Permanganatometry
3139. What method is used for the quantification of bismuth in a preparation?
a. Argentometry
b. Mercurimetry
*c. Complexonometry
d. Iodometry
e. Permanganatometry
3140. What method is used for the quantification of bismuth in a preparation?
a. Iodometry
b. Mercurimetry
*c. Complexonometry
d. Argentometry
e. Permanganatometry
3141. What method is used for the quantification of magnesium sulfate solution for injections?
*a. Complexonometry
b. Cerimetry
c. Acid-base titration
d. Nitritometry
e. Iodine monochloride titration
3142. What method is used for the quantification of magnesium sulfate solution for injections?
a. Iodine monochloride titration
*b. Complexonometry
c. Nitritometry
d. Acid-base titration
e. Cerimetry
3143. What method is used for the quantification of magnesium sulfate solution for injections?
a. Nitritometry
b. Iodine monochloride titration
*c. Complexonometry
d. Cerimetry
e. Acid-base titration
3144. What method is used to destroy an emulsion?
a. Condensation
b. Homogenization
*c. Centrifugation
d. Dispersion
e. Emulsification
3145. What method is used to destroy an emulsion?
a. Dispersion
b. Homogenization
c. Condensation
*d. Centrifugation
e. Emulsification
3146. What method is used to destroy an emulsion?
a. Emulsification
b. Dispersion
c. Homogenization
d. Condensation
*e. Centrifugation
3147. What method of microspecimen staining is used to detect Mycobacterium tuberculosis?
*a. Ziehl-Nielsen stain
b. Neisser stain
c. Burri-Gins stain
d. Romanowsky-Giemsa stain
e. Gram stain
3148. What method of microspecimen staining is used to detect Mycobacterium tuberculosis?
a. Burri-Gins stain
b. Romanowsky-Giemsa stain
*c. Ziehl-Nielsen stain
d. Gram stain
e. Neisser stain
3149. What method of microspecimen staining is used to detect Mycobacterium tuberculosis?
a. Romanowsky-Giemsa stain
b. Neisser stain
c. Gram stain
d. Burri-Gins stain
*e. Ziehl-Nielsen stain
3150. What method of redox titration uses specific pH indicators for fixation of the titration endpoint?
a. Nitritometry
b. Cerimetry
*c. Bromatometry
d. Iodometry
e. Permanganatometry
3151. What method of redox titration uses specific pH indicators for fixation of the titration endpoint?
a. Nitritometry
b. Cerimetry
c. Permanganatometry
d. Iodometry
*e. Bromatometry
3152. What method of redox titration uses specific pH indicators for fixation of the titration endpoint?
a. Permanganatometry
b. Nitritometry
c. Iodometry
*d. Bromatometry
e. Cerimetry
3153. What method of titrimetric analysis is used to quantify streptocide (sulfanilamide) with a KBrO_3 solution in the presence of KBr?
*a. Bromatometry
b. Vanadatometry
c. Permanganometry
d. Iodometry
e. Dichromatometry
3154. What method of titrimetric analysis is used to quantify streptocide (sulfanilamide) with a KBrO_3 solution in the presence of KBr?
a. Iodometry
*b. Bromatometry
c. Vanadatometry
d. Permanganometry
e. Dichromatometry
3155. What method of titrimetric analysis is used to quantify streptocide (sulfanilamide) with a KBrO_3 solution in the presence of KBr?
a. Vanadatometry
b. Permanganometry
c. Iodometry
*d. Bromatometry
e. Dichromatometry
3156. What method of titrimetric analysis requires the use of both external and internal indicators?
*a. Nitrite titration
b. Argentometry
c. Alkalimetry
d. Permanganatometry
e. Complexometric titration
3157. What method of titrimetric analysis requires the use of both external and internal indicators?
a. Complexometric titration
b. Argentometry
c. Permanganatometry
*d. Nitrite titration
e. Alkalimetry
3158. What method of titrimetric analysis requires the use of both external and internal indicators?
a. Permanganatometry
*b. Nitrite titration
c. Complexometric titration
d. Argentometry
e. Alkalimetry
3159. What mucolytic agent would you recommend for the patient with acute bronchitis to facilitate expectoration?
*a. Acetylcysteine
b. Glaucine
c. Codeine
d. Libexin (Prenoxdiazine)
e. Hydrocodone
3160. What mucolytic agent would you recommend for the patient with acute bronchitis to facilitate expectoration?
*a. Acetylcysteine
b. Hydrocodone
c. Codeine
d. Libexin (Prenoxdiazine)
e. Glaucine
3161. What mucolytic agent would you recommend for the patient with acute bronchitis to facilitate expectoration?
a. Hydrocodone
*b. Acetylcysteine
c. Codeine
d. Libexin (Prenoxdiazine)
e. Glaucine
3162. What must be used to obtain a stable direct emulsion?
a. Any emulsifier
b. Calcium oleate
c. Hydrophobic emulsifier
*d. Hydrophilic emulsifier
e. Lead stearate
3163. What must be used to obtain a stable direct emulsion?
a. Hydrophobic emulsifier
b. Calcium oleate
*c. Hydrophilic emulsifier
d. Lead stearate
e. Any emulsifier
3164. What must be used to obtain a stable direct emulsion?
a. Lead stearate
b. Hydrophobic emulsifier
c. Any emulsifier
d. Calcium oleate
*e. Hydrophilic emulsifier
3165. What non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs selectively block COX-2?
*a. Meloxicam, Nimesulide
b. Ibuprofen, Ketoprofen
c. Mefenamic acid, Naproxen
d. Indomethacin, Diclofenac sodium
e. Ortophen, Voltaren
3166. What non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs selectively block COX-2?
*a. Meloxicam, Nimesulide
b. Indomethacin, Diclofenac sodium
c. Mefenamic acid, Naproxen
d. Ortophen, Voltaren
e. Ibuprofen, Ketoprofen
3167. What non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs selectively block COX-2?
a. Ortophen, Voltaren
b. Ibuprofen, Ketoprofen
c. Mefenamic acid, Naproxen
*d. Meloxicam, Nimesulide
e. Indomethacin, Diclofenac sodium
3168. What nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug selectively inhibits COX-2 and has no ulcerogenic effect?
a. Acetylsalicylic acid
*b. Celecoxib
c. Diclofenac sodium
d. Paracetamol
e. Ibuprofen
3169. What nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug selectively inhibits COX-2 and has no ulcerogenic effect?
a. Acetylsalicylic acid
b. Diclofenac sodium
c. Ibuprofen
d. Paracetamol
*e. Celecoxib
3170. What nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug selectively inhibits COX-2 and has no ulcerogenic effect?
a. Diclofenac sodium
b. Paracetamol
c. Acetylsalicylic acid
d. Ibuprofen
*e. Celecoxib
3171. What nutrient medium is used for obtaining a fungal culture?
a. Casein-carbon agar
b. Endo medium
*c. Sabouraud medium
d. Ploskirev medium
e. Kitt-Tarozzi medium
3172. What nutrient medium is used for obtaining a fungal culture?
a. Endo medium
b. Kitt-Tarozzi medium
*c. Sabouraud medium
d. Casein-carbon agar
e. Ploskirev medium
3173. What nutrient medium is used for obtaining a fungal culture?
a. Kitt-Tarozzi medium
b. Casein-carbon agar
c. Ploskirev medium
d. Endo medium
*e. Sabouraud medium
3174. What nutrient medium should be used by a laboratory technician to determine the total fungal count in a soft dosage form?
*a. Sabouraud agar
b. Endo medium
c. Meat peptone agar
d. Mannitol salt agar
e. Bismuth sulfite agar
3175. What nutrient medium should be used by a laboratory technician to determine the total fungal count in a soft dosage form?
a. Endo medium
b. Meat peptone agar
c. Mannitol salt agar
d. Bismuth sulfite agar
*e. Sabouraud agar
3176. What nutrient medium should be used by a laboratory technician to determine the total fungal count in a soft dosage form?
a. Mannitol salt agar
b. Meat peptone agar
c. Endo medium
d. Bismuth sulfite agar
*e. Sabouraud agar
3177. What optical phenomenon is most intensive in suspensions?
a. Light absorption
*b. Light reflection
c. Light scattering
d. Light refraction
e. Light transmission
3178. What optical phenomenon is most intensive in suspensions?
a. Light scattering
*b. Light reflection
c. Light transmission
d. Light refraction
e. Light absorption
3179. What optical phenomenon is most intensive in suspensions?
a. Light transmission
*b. Light reflection
c. Light refraction
d. Light scattering
e. Light absorption
3180. What organelles in a plant cell accumulate reserve and ergastic substances and water, maintain osmotic pressure and turgor of the cell, contain cell sap, and are separated from the cytoplasm by a tonoplast?
*a. Vacuoles
b. Chloroplasts
c. Ribosomes
d. Lysosomes
e. Mitochondria
3181. What organelles in a plant cell accumulate reserve and ergastic substances and water, maintain osmotic pressure and turgor of the cell, contain cell sap, and are separated from the cytoplasm by a tonoplast?
a. Chloroplasts
b. Mitochondria
c. Ribosomes
d. Lysosomes
*e. Vacuoles
3182. What organelles in a plant cell accumulate reserve and ergastic substances and water, maintain osmotic pressure and turgor of the cell, contain cell sap, and are separated from the cytoplasm by a tonoplast?
a. Mitochondria
b. Ribosomes
c. Lysosomes
d. Chloroplasts
*e. Vacuoles
3183. What pair of electrodes is used in potentiometric redox titration?
a. Copper electrode and zinc electrode
b. Glass electrode and silver chloride electrode
c. Silver electrode and platinum electrode
*d. Platinum electrode and silver chloride electrode
e. Silver sulfide electrode and silver chloride electrode
3184. What pair of electrodes is used in potentiometric redox titration?
a. Copper electrode and zinc electrode
b. Silver electrode and platinum electrode
c. Glass electrode and silver chloride electrode
*d. Platinum electrode and silver chloride electrode
e. Silver sulfide electrode and silver chloride electrode
3185. What pair of electrodes is used in potentiometric redox titration?
a. Silver electrode and platinum electrode
b. Glass electrode and silver chloride electrode
c. Silver sulfide electrode and silver chloride electrode
*d. Platinum electrode and silver chloride electrode
e. Copper electrode and zinc electrode
3186. What parameter determines the coagulating power of an electrolyte?
a. Sol density
b. Sol dispersion degree
c. Electrolyte concentration
*d. Charge of the coagulator ion
e. Sol volume
3187. What parameter determines the coagulating power of an electrolyte?
a. Sol volume
b. Sol density
*c. Charge of the coagulator ion
d. Electrolyte concentration
e. Sol dispersion degree
3188. What parameter determines the coagulating power of an electrolyte?
a. Sol volume
b. Sol dispersion degree
c. Sol density
*d. Charge of the coagulator ion
e. Electrolyte concentration
3189. What parameter is determined during a blood test for erythrocyte sedimentation rate?
a. Coagulation threshold
b. -
c. Aggregate stability
d. Kinetic stability
*e. Sedimentation stability
3190. What parameter is determined during a blood test for erythrocyte sedimentation rate?
a. Coagulation threshold
b. Aggregate stability
*c. Sedimentation stability
d. -
e. Kinetic stability
3191. What parameter is determined during a blood test for erythrocyte sedimentation rate?
a. Kinetic stability
b. Coagulation threshold
*c. Sedimentation stability
d. -
e. Aggregate stability
3192. What particles of the micelle described by the following formula: m(AgCl) nAg^+ (n-x) NO_3^-^x+ xNO_3^- are situated in diffusion layer?
a. AgCl
b. AgCl and Ag^+
c. Ag^+ and NO_3^-
d. Ag^+
*e. NO_3^-
3193. What particles of the micelle described by the following formula: m(AgCl) nAg^+ (n-x) NO_3^-^x+ xNO_3^- are situated in diffusion layer?
a. AgCl and Ag^+
b. AgCl
c. Ag^+ and NO_3^-
*d. NO_3^-
e. Ag^+
3194. What particles of the micelle described by the following formula: m(AgCl) nAg^+ (n-x) NO_3^-^x+ xNO_3^- are situated in diffusion layer?
a. Ag^+ and NO_3^-
b. Ag^+
c. AgCl
*d. NO_3^-
e. AgCl and Ag^+
3195. What pathologies facilitate cumulation of drugs?
*a. Diseases of liver and kidneys
b. Diseases of respiratory tracts
c. Diseases of locomotor apparatus
d. Diseases of CNS
e. Diseases of connective tissue
3196. What pathologies facilitate cumulation of drugs?
a. Diseases of CNS
b. Diseases of locomotor apparatus
c. Diseases of respiratory tracts
d. Diseases of connective tissue
*e. Diseases of liver and kidneys
3197. What pathologies facilitate cumulation of drugs?
a. Diseases of connective tissue
*b. Diseases of liver and kidneys
c. Diseases of respiratory tracts
d. Diseases of CNS
e. Diseases of locomotor apparatus
3198. What pharmacological effect of acetylsalicylic acid allows its application in patients with ischemic heart disease for prevention of thromboses?
a. Analgesic
b. Ulcerogenic
c. Antipyretic
*d. Antiaggregant
e. Anti-inflammatory
3199. What pharmacological effect of acetylsalicylic acid allows its application in patients with ischemic heart disease for prevention of thromboses?
a. Antipyretic
*b. Antiaggregant
c. Ulcerogenic
d. Anti-inflammatory
e. Analgesic
3200. What pharmacological effect of acetylsalicylic acid allows its application in patients with ischemic heart disease for prevention of thromboses?
a. Ulcerogenic
b. Antipyretic
c. Analgesic
*d. Antiaggregant
e. Anti-inflammatory
3201. What pharmacological effect of acetylsalicylic acid allows using it for prevention of thrombosis in patients with ischemic heart disease?
a. Antipyretic
*b. Antiaggregant
c. Analgesic
d. Ulcerogenic
e. Anti-inflammatory
3202. What pharmacological effect of acetylsalicylic acid allows using it for prevention of thrombosis in patients with ischemic heart disease?
a. Ulcerogenic
b. Analgesic
c. Anti-inflammatory
d. Antipyretic
*e. Antiaggregant
3203. What pharmacological effect of acetylsalicylic acid allows using it for prevention of thrombosis in patients with ischemic heart disease?
a. Ulcerogenic
b. Anti-inflammatory
*c. Antiaggregant
d. Analgesic
e. Antipyretic
3204. What physical phenomenon is measured using stalagmometry?
a. Concentration
b. Osmotic pressure
c. Isoelectric point
d. Molecular mass
*e. Surface tension
3205. What physical phenomenon is measured using stalagmometry?
a. Isoelectric point
*b. Surface tension
c. Molecular mass
d. Concentration
e. Osmotic pressure
3206. What physical phenomenon is measured using stalagmometry?
a. Isoelectric point
b. Osmotic pressure
c. Molecular mass
*d. Surface tension
e. Concentration
3207. What plant is a component of the pectoral herbal tea and has characteristic basal long-petiolate, broadly ovate leaves that are white and downy from below and dark green, bare, and glossy from above?
a. Thymus serpillum
b. Origanum vulgare
*c. Tussilago farfara
d. Sambucus nigra
e. Verbascum phlomoides
3208. What plant is a component of the pectoral herbal tea and has characteristic basal long-petiolate, broadly ovate leaves that are white and downy from below and dark green, bare, and glossy from above?
a. Verbascum phlomoides
*b. Tussilago farfara
c. Thymus serpillum
d. Origanum vulgare
e. Sambucus nigra
3209. What plant is a component of the pectoral herbal tea and has characteristic basal long-petiolate, broadly ovate leaves that are white and downy from below and dark green, bare, and glossy from above?
a. Verbascum phlomoides
b. Origanum vulgare
c. Sambucus nigra
*d. Tussilago farfara
e. Thymus serpillum
3210. What potential forms at the interface between two solutions?
a. Electrokinetic potential
*b. Diffusion potential
c. Surface potential
d. Electrode potential
e. Contact potential
3211. What potential forms at the interface between two solutions?
a. Electrokinetic potential
b. Contact potential
*c. Diffusion potential
d. Electrode potential
e. Surface potential
3212. What potential forms at the interface between two solutions?
a. Electrokinetic potential
b. Surface potential
c. Contact potential
*d. Diffusion potential
e. Electrode potential
3213. What process occurs as a result of electrolytes effect on a solution of a high-molecular compound?
*a. Salting out
b. Thixotropy
c. Solvation
d. Coacervation
e. Syneresis
3214. What process occurs as a result of electrolytes effect on a solution of a high-molecular compound?
a. Syneresis
b. Solvation
*c. Salting out
d. Coacervation
e. Thixotropy
3215. What process occurs as a result of electrolytes effect on a solution of a high-molecular compound?
a. Thixotropy
b. Solvation
c. Coacervation
d. Syneresis
*e. Salting out
3216. What product forms as a result of a reaction between aniline and benzaldehyde?
a. Cyanohydrin
*b. N-benzylideneaniline
c. Oxime
d. Hemiacetal
e. N,N-dimethylaniline
3217. What product forms as a result of a reaction between aniline and benzaldehyde?
a. Cyanohydrin
b. Hemiacetal
c. Oxime
d. N,N-dimethylaniline
*e. N-benzylideneaniline
3218. What product forms as a result of a reaction between aniline and benzaldehyde?
a. Cyanohydrin
b. N,N-dimethylaniline
c. Oxime
d. Hemiacetal
*e. N-benzylideneaniline
3219. What product is formed during the Wagner reaction, when alkenes are being oxidired with potassium permanganate in an aqueous medium?
a. Aldehyde
*b. Glycol
c. Carboxylic acid
d. Epoxide
e. Ketone
3220. What product is formed during the Wagner reaction, when alkenes are being oxidired with potassium permanganate in an aqueous medium?
a. Carboxylic acid
b. Aldehyde
*c. Glycol
d. Epoxide
e. Ketone
3221. What product is formed during the Wagner reaction, when alkenes are being oxidired with potassium permanganate in an aqueous medium?
a. Ketone
*b. Glycol
c. Carboxylic acid
d. Aldehyde
e. Epoxide
3222. What reaction can be used to distinguish propyne from propene?
a. Decoloration of KMnО_4 solution
b. Decoloration of bromine water solution
c. Wurtz's reaction
d. Polymerization
*e. Formation of acetylenides
3223. What reaction can be used to distinguish propyne from propene?
a. Decoloration of KMnО_4 solution
b. Polymerization
c. Decoloration of bromine water solution
*d. Formation of acetylenides
e. Wurtz's reaction
3224. What reaction can be used to distinguish propyne from propene?
a. Polymerization
b. Decoloration of KMnО_4 solution
c. Wurtz's reaction
*d. Formation of acetylenides
e. Decoloration of bromine water solution
3225. What reaction is the common reaction for detection of arsenic(III) and arsenic(V) compounds?
*a. Reaction of reduction to arsine
b. Reaction with ammonium molybdate
c. Reaction with iodine
d. Reaction with potassium iodide
e. Reaction with sodium nitrate
3226. What reaction is the common reaction for detection of arsenic(III) and arsenic(V) compounds?
a. Reaction with ammonium molybdate
b. Reaction with iodine
c. Reaction with sodium nitrate
*d. Reaction of reduction to arsine
e. Reaction with potassium iodide
3227. What reaction is the common reaction for detection of arsenic(III) and arsenic(V) compounds?
a. Reaction with sodium nitrate
b. Reaction with potassium iodide
c. Reaction with iodine
*d. Reaction of reduction to arsine
e. Reaction with ammonium molybdate
3228. What reaction must be conducted by an analytical chemist during the preliminary tests to determine chromium(III) ions?
a. Reaction with ammonia
*b. Reaction for formation of a perchromic acid after preliminary oxidation of chromium
c. Reaction with potassium permanganate
d. Reaction with sodium hydroxide
e. Reaction with sodium hydroxide and hydrogen peroxide
3229. What reaction must be conducted by an analytical chemist during the preliminary tests to determine chromium(III) ions?
a. Reaction with sodium hydroxide
b. Reaction with ammonia
c. Reaction with potassium permanganate
d. Reaction with sodium hydroxide and hydrogen peroxide
*e. Reaction for formation of a perchromic acid after preliminary oxidation of chromium
3230. What reaction must be conducted by an analytical chemist during the preliminary tests to determine chromium(III) ions?
a. Reaction with sodium hydroxide and hydrogen peroxide
b. Reaction with potassium permanganate
c. Reaction with ammonia
*d. Reaction for formation of a perchromic acid after preliminary oxidation of chromium
e. Reaction with sodium hydroxide
3231. What reaction occurs when ascorbic acid is being determined by means of iodometry?
*a. Redox
b. Neutralization
c. Precipitation
d. Acylation
e. Complex formation
3232. What reaction occurs when ascorbic acid is being determined by means of iodometry?
a. Acylation
b. Complex formation
c. Precipitation
d. Neutralization
*e. Redox
3233. What reaction occurs when ascorbic acid is being determined by means of iodometry?
a. Precipitation
b. Complex formation
c. Neutralization
d. Acylation
*e. Redox
3234. What reagent allows distinguishing between maltose (a reducing disaccharide) and sucrose (a non-reducing disaccharide)?
*a. Tollens reagent
b. FeCl_3
c. K_4[Fe(CN_6)]
d. NaOH
e. Br_2
3235. What reagent allows distinguishing between maltose (a reducing disaccharide) and sucrose (a non-reducing disaccharide)?
a. FeCl_3
b. Br_2
*c. Tollens reagent
d. NaOH
e. K_4[Fe(CN_6)]
3236. What reagent allows distinguishing between maltose (a reducing disaccharide) and sucrose (a non-reducing disaccharide)?
a. NaOH
b. Br_2
c. FeCl_3
d. K_4[Fe(CN_6)]
*e. Tollens reagent
3237. What reagent allows to simultaneously detect aldehyde group and glycol fragment presence in glucose molecule?
*a. Cu(OH)_2
b. Br_2
c. AlCl_3
d. KMnO_4
e. FeCl_3
3238. What reagent allows to simultaneously detect aldehyde group and glycol fragment presence in glucose molecule?
*a. Cu(OH)_2
b. Br_2
c. KMnO_4
d. FeCl_3
e. AlCl_3
3239. What reagent allows to simultaneously detect aldehyde group and glycol fragment presence in glucose molecule?
a. KMnO_4
b. AlCl_3
c. Br_2
d. FeCl_3
*e. Cu(OH)_2
3240. What reagent can be used to distinguish between ethanol (C_2H_5OH) and glycerine?
a. FeCl_3
b. KMnO_4
c. HBr
*d. Cu(OH)_2
e. Ag_2O
3241. What reagent can be used to distinguish between ethanol (C_2H_5OH) and glycerine?
a. KMnO_4
b. Ag_2O
c. FeCl_3
d. HBr
*e. Cu(OH)_2
3242. What reagent can be used to distinguish between ethanol (C_2H_5OH) and glycerine?
a. KMnO_4
b. HBr
c. Ag_2O
d. FeCl_3
*e. Cu(OH)_2
3243. What reagent is used to detect and photometrically determine Fe(II) and Fe(III) cations?
*a. Sulfosalicylic acid
b. Chloroacetic acid
c. Phenylacetic acid
d. Oxalic acid
e. P-aminobenzoic acid
3244. What reagent is used to detect and photometrically determine Fe(II) and Fe(III) cations?
*a. Sulfosalicylic acid
b. Oxalic acid
c. Chloroacetic acid
d. P-aminobenzoic acid
e. Phenylacetic acid
3245. What reagent is used to detect and photometrically determine Fe(II) and Fe(III) cations?
a. P-aminobenzoic acid
*b. Sulfosalicylic acid
c. Oxalic acid
d. Chloroacetic acid
e. Phenylacetic acid
3246. What reagent will allow for unsaturated organic compounds reduction under the conditions given below?
a. HNO_3, p, t
*b. H_2, Ni, t
c. H_2O, Hg^2+, H^+
d. NaOH, H_2O
e. K_2Cr_2O_7, H^+
3247. What reagent will allow for unsaturated organic compounds reduction under the conditions given below?
a. K_2Cr_2O_7, H^+
b. HNO_3, p, t
c. NaOH, H_2O
*d. H_2, Ni, t
e. H_2O, Hg^2+, H^+
3248. What reagent will allow for unsaturated organic compounds reduction under the conditions given below?
a. K_2Cr_2O_7, H^+
b. NaOH, H_2O
c. H_2O, Hg^2+, H^+
*d. H_2, Ni, t
e. HNO_3, p, t
3249. What reference electrode can be used in potentiometric analysis of a medicinal substance?
a. Antimony
*b. Silver chloride
c. Quinhydrone
d. Glass
e. Zinc
3250. What reference electrode can be used in potentiometric analysis of a medicinal substance?
a. Glass
b. Quinhydrone
c. Antimony
d. Zinc
*e. Silver chloride
3251. What reference electrode can be used in potentiometric analysis of a medicinal substance?
a. Zinc
*b. Silver chloride
c. Quinhydrone
d. Antimony
e. Glass
3252. What rule describes the coagulation of sols under the effect of electrolytes?
*a. Schulze-Hardy rule
b. Gibbs rule
c. Arrhenius equation
d. Van 't Hoff rule
e. Duclos–Traube rule
3253. What rule describes the coagulation of sols under the effect of electrolytes?
a. Arrhenius equation
b. Gibbs rule
c. Duclos–Traube rule
d. Van 't Hoff rule
*e. Schulze-Hardy rule
3254. What rule describes the coagulation of sols under the effect of electrolytes?
a. Van 't Hoff rule
b. Duclos–Traube rule
c. Gibbs rule
*d. Schulze-Hardy rule
e. Arrhenius equation
3255. What sanitary-indicative microorganisms are used for the assessment of the microbial contamination levels of potable water?
*a. Escherichia coli
b. Clostridium perfringens
c. Candida albicans
d. Streptococcus viridans
e. Staphylococcus aureus
3256. What sanitary-indicative microorganisms are used for the assessment of the microbial contamination levels of potable water?
*a. Escherichia coli
b. Clostridium perfringens
c. Streptococcus viridans
d. Candida albicans
e. Staphylococcus aureus
3257. What sanitary-indicative microorganisms are used for the assessment of the microbial contamination levels of potable water?
a. Clostridium perfringens
*b. Escherichia coli
c. Candida albicans
d. Staphylococcus aureus
e. Streptococcus viridans
3258. What short-acting loop diuretic can cause significant hypokalemia?
a. Mannitol
b. Amіlorіde
c. Spironolactone
*d. Furosemide
e. Triamterene
3259. What short-acting loop diuretic can cause significant hypokalemia?
a. Spironolactone
b. Triamterene
c. Mannitol
*d. Furosemide
e. Amіlorіde
3260. What short-acting loop diuretic can cause significant hypokalemia?
a. Triamterene
b. Mannitol
*c. Furosemide
d. Spironolactone
e. Amіlorіde
3261. What should be used as an indicator electrode in potentiometric titration aimed at quantifying iron(II) sulfate?
a. Antimony
*b. Platinum
c. Silver chloride
d. Glass
e. Quinhydrone
3262. What should be used as an indicator electrode in potentiometric titration aimed at quantifying iron(II) sulfate?
a. Antimony
b. Glass
c. Quinhydrone
*d. Platinum
e. Silver chloride
3263. What should be used as an indicator electrode in potentiometric titration aimed at quantifying iron(II) sulfate?
a. Quinhydrone
*b. Platinum
c. Antimony
d. Silver chloride
e. Glass
3264. What solution can be determined by the photocolorimetric method measuring self-absorbance?
*a. Potassium chromate
b. Potassium chloride
c. Potassium sulphate
d. Potassium nitrate
e. Potassium phosphate
3265. What solution can be determined by the photocolorimetric method measuring self-absorbance?
a. Potassium nitrate
*b. Potassium chromate
c. Potassium phosphate
d. Potassium sulphate
e. Potassium chloride
3266. What solution can be determined by the photocolorimetric method measuring self-absorbance?
a. Potassium phosphate
*b. Potassium chromate
c. Potassium chloride
d. Potassium nitrate
e. Potassium sulphate
3267. What solution can be used to detrmine the presence of chloride ions in the potable water?
*a. Silver nitrate
b. Potassium bromate
c. Sodium hydroxide
d. Iodine
e. Ammonia
3268. What solution can be used to detrmine the presence of chloride ions in the potable water?
a. Iodine
*b. Silver nitrate
c. Ammonia
d. Sodium hydroxide
e. Potassium bromate
3269. What solution can be used to detrmine the presence of chloride ions in the potable water?
a. Sodium hydroxide
b. Iodine
c. Potassium bromate
*d. Silver nitrate
e. Ammonia
3270. What solution has the highest osmotic pressure at the temperature of 298 K?
a. Sodium benzoate solution
b. Urea solution
*c. Aluminum sulfate solution
d. Glucose solution
e. Sodium sulfate solution
3271. What solution has the highest osmotic pressure at the temperature of 298 K?
a. Sodium sulfate solution
b. Glucose solution
*c. Aluminum sulfate solution
d. Sodium benzoate solution
e. Urea solution
3272. What solution has the highest osmotic pressure at the temperature of 298 K?
a. Urea solution
b. Sodium benzoate solution
*c. Aluminum sulfate solution
d. Sodium sulfate solution
e. Glucose solution
3273. What solution is used as a process solution (titrant) in alkalimetry?
a. Ammonium hydroxide
b. Hydrochloric acid
*c. Potassium hydroxide
d. Oxalic acid
e. Sodium tetraborate
3274. What solution is used as a process solution (titrant) in alkalimetry?
a. Hydrochloric acid
b. Oxalic acid
*c. Potassium hydroxide
d. Ammonium hydroxide
e. Sodium tetraborate
3275. What solution is used as a process solution (titrant) in alkalimetry?
a. Oxalic acid
b. Hydrochloric acid
*c. Potassium hydroxide
d. Ammonium hydroxide
e. Sodium tetraborate
3276. What solution is used to standardize the silver(I) nitrate titrant solution in Mohr's method?
a. Potassium dichromate solution
b. Sodium carbonate solution
c. Sodium tetraborate solution
d. Sodium oxalate solution
*e. Sodium chloride solution
3277. What solution is used to standardize the silver(I) nitrate titrant solution in Mohr's method?
a. Sodium carbonate solution
b. Sodium tetraborate solution
*c. Sodium chloride solution
d. Sodium oxalate solution
e. Potassium dichromate solution
3278. What solution is used to standardize the silver(I) nitrate titrant solution in Mohr's method?
a. Sodium tetraborate solution
b. Sodium oxalate solution
c. Sodium carbonate solution
*d. Sodium chloride solution
e. Potassium dichromate solution
3279. What specific reagent is used in the qualitative analysis for Fe^2+ cations?
*a. K_3[Fe(CN)_6]
b. NH_4OH
c. K_4[Fe(CN)_6]
d. NaOH
e. K_2Na[Co(NO_2)_6]
3280. What specific reagent is used in the qualitative analysis for Fe^2+ cations?
a. K_2Na[Co(NO_2)_6]
b. NH_4OH
*c. K_3[Fe(CN)_6]
d. NaOH
e. K_4[Fe(CN)_6]
3281. What specific reagent is used in the qualitative analysis for Fe^2+ cations?
a. K_2Na[Co(NO_2)_6]
b. NH_4OH
c. K_4[Fe(CN)_6]
d. NaOH
*e. K_3[Fe(CN)_6]
3282. What standard solution can be used to standardize the solution of I_2?
*a. Sodium thiosulfate solution
b. Potassium iodide solution
c. Potassium dichromate solution
d. Potassium permanganate solution
e. Sodium nitrite solution
3283. What standard solution can be used to standardize the solution of I_2?
a. Potassium iodide solution
*b. Sodium thiosulfate solution
c. Potassium dichromate solution
d. Sodium nitrite solution
e. Potassium permanganate solution
3284. What standard solution can be used to standardize the solution of I_2?
a. Sodium nitrite solution
b. Potassium permanganate solution
*c. Sodium thiosulfate solution
d. Potassium iodide solution
e. Potassium dichromate solution
3285. What substance can be used to prepare primary standard solutions of titrants?
a. HCl
*b. К_2Cr_2О_7
c. NaOH
d. KMnO_4
e. I_2
3286. What substance can be used to prepare primary standard solutions of titrants?
a. KMnO_4
*b. К_2Cr_2О_7
c. I_2
d. HCl
e. NaOH
3287. What substance can be used to prepare primary standard solutions of titrants?
a. KMnO_4
b. NaOH
c. I_2
d. HCl
*e. К_2Cr_2О_7
3288. What substance can enter into substitution and addition reactions?
a. Ethanol
b. Polypeptide
*c. Acetylene
d. Ethylene
e. Ethane
3289. What substance can enter into substitution and addition reactions?
a. Polypeptide
b. Ethane
*c. Acetylene
d. Ethylene
e. Ethanol
3290. What substance can enter into substitution and addition reactions?
a. Polypeptide
b. Ethanol
c. Ethylene
d. Ethane
*e. Acetylene
3291. What substance causes impaired biotin absorption?
*a. Avidin
b. Albumin
c. Globulin
d. Ferritin
e. Transferrin
3292. What substance causes impaired biotin absorption?
a. Ferritin
b. Transferrin
*c. Avidin
d. Globulin
e. Albumin
3293. What substance causes impaired biotin absorption?
a. Transferrin
*b. Avidin
c. Globulin
d. Ferritin
e. Albumin
3294. What substance forms colloid solution when dissolved in water?
*a. Collargol
b. Sodium sulfate
c. Silver nitrate
d. Potassium gluconate
e. Sucrose
3295. What substance forms colloid solution when dissolved in water?
a. Sodium sulfate
b. Potassium gluconate
c. Silver nitrate
*d. Collargol
e. Sucrose
3296. What substance forms colloid solution when dissolved in water?
a. Sodium sulfate
b. Sucrose
*c. Collargol
d. Potassium gluconate
e. Silver nitrate
3297. What substance is a mediator of delayed-type hypersensitivity?
*a. Lymphokines
b. Histamine
c. Serotonin
d. Prostaglandins
e. Bradykinin
3298. What substance is a mediator of delayed-type hypersensitivity?
a. Bradykinin
b. Serotonin
c. Prostaglandins
d. Histamine
*e. Lymphokines
3299. What substance is a mediator of delayed-type hypersensitivity?
a. Serotonin
b. Bradykinin
*c. Lymphokines
d. Histamine
e. Prostaglandins
3300. What substance is a unique accumulator, donor, and transformer of energy within the body?
a. Acetyl-CoA
b. Succinyl-CoA
*c. Adenosine triphosphate
d. Creatine phosphate
e. Phosphoenolpyruvate
3301. What substance is a unique accumulator, donor, and transformer of energy within the body?
a. Creatine phosphate
*b. Adenosine triphosphate
c. Phosphoenolpyruvate
d. Acetyl-CoA
e. Succinyl-CoA
3302. What substance is a unique accumulator, donor, and transformer of energy within the body?
a. Creatine phosphate
b. Acetyl-CoA
*c. Adenosine triphosphate
d. Phosphoenolpyruvate
e. Succinyl-CoA
3303. What substance is deposited in the proteoplasts of seed cells of higher plants in the form of crystals and simple and complex aleurone grains?
*a. Protein
b. Glycogen
c. Inulin
d. Starch
e. Fatty oil
3304. What substance is deposited in the proteoplasts of seed cells of higher plants in the form of crystals and simple and complex aleurone grains?
a. Glycogen
b. Inulin
*c. Protein
d. Starch
e. Fatty oil
3305. What substance is deposited in the proteoplasts of seed cells of higher plants in the form of crystals and simple and complex aleurone grains?
a. Starch
b. Glycogen
c. Fatty oil
*d. Protein
e. Inulin
3306. What substance is used as a primary standard in permanganometry, bromatometry, dichromatometry, iodometry, and cerimetry?
a. Potassium hydroxide
b. Ammonium acetate
c. Sodium chloride
*d. Arsenic(III) oxide
e. Sodium carbonate
3307. What substance is used as a primary standard in permanganometry, bromatometry, dichromatometry, iodometry, and cerimetry?
a. Potassium hydroxide
b. Sodium carbonate
c. Ammonium acetate
d. Sodium chloride
*e. Arsenic(III) oxide
3308. What substance is used as a primary standard in permanganometry, bromatometry, dichromatometry, iodometry, and cerimetry?
a. Sodium carbonate
b. Ammonium acetate
c. Sodium chloride
*d. Arsenic(III) oxide
e. Potassium hydroxide
3309. What substances given below are not surfactants?
a. Alcohols and soaps
b. Amines and sulfonic acids
*c. Inorganic acids, bases, and their salts
d. Aldehydes and alcohols
e. Carboxylic acids and soaps
3310. What substances given below are not surfactants?
a. Aldehydes and alcohols
b. Alcohols and soaps
*c. Inorganic acids, bases, and their salts
d. Carboxylic acids and soaps
e. Amines and sulfonic acids
3311. What substances given below are not surfactants?
a. Carboxylic acids and soaps
b. Aldehydes and alcohols
c. Amines and sulfonic acids
d. Alcohols and soaps
*e. Inorganic acids, bases, and their salts
3312. What synthetic drug of the hydrazide group is typically prescribed for pulmonary tuberculosis?
*a. Isoniazid
b. Doxycycline hydrochloride
c. Acyclovir
d. Metronidazole
e. Rifampicin
3313. What synthetic drug of the hydrazide group is typically prescribed for pulmonary tuberculosis?
*a. Isoniazid
b. Doxycycline hydrochloride
c. Metronidazole
d. Rifampicin
e. Acyclovir
3314. What synthetic drug of the hydrazide group is typically prescribed for pulmonary tuberculosis?
a. Rifampicin
b. Acyclovir
c. Doxycycline hydrochloride
d. Metronidazole
*e. Isoniazid
3315. What test is used for identification of uric acid and other compounds with purine nucleus?
*a. Murexide reaction
b. Lucas reagent
c. Fehling reagent
d. Copper mirror reaction
e. Silver mirror reaction
3316. What test is used for identification of uric acid and other compounds with purine nucleus?
a. Fehling reagent
b. Silver mirror reaction
c. Lucas reagent
*d. Murexide reaction
e. Copper mirror reaction
3317. What test is used for identification of uric acid and other compounds with purine nucleus?
a. Silver mirror reaction
*b. Murexide reaction
c. Lucas reagent
d. Fehling reagent
e. Copper mirror reaction
3318. What thermodynamic parameter does not allow measuring its absolute value?
*a. Internal energy
b. Work
c. Heat capacity
d. Thermal effect
e. Heat
3319. What thermodynamic parameter does not allow measuring its absolute value?
a. Heat capacity
b. Thermal effect
c. Heat
d. Work
*e. Internal energy
3320. What thermodynamic parameter does not allow measuring its absolute value?
a. Heat capacity
b. Work
c. Thermal effect
*d. Internal energy
e. Heat
3321. What thermodynamic potential is the criterion for the direction of a spontaneous process at constant volume and temperature?
a. Entropy
b. Gibbs energy
c. Chemical potential
*d. Helmholtz energy
e. Enthalpy
3322. What thermodynamic potential is the criterion for the direction of a spontaneous process at constant volume and temperature?
a. Gibbs energy
*b. Helmholtz energy
c. Enthalpy
d. Entropy
e. Chemical potential
3323. What thermodynamic potential is the criterion for the direction of a spontaneous process at constant volume and temperature?
a. Gibbs energy
*b. Helmholtz energy
c. Entropy
d. Enthalpy
e. Chemical potential
3324. What titrant is used in bromatometric titration?
a. Br_2
b. KBrO_4
c. KBrO_4 + KCl
*d. KBrO_3
e. KBr
3325. What titrant is used in bromatometric titration?
a. KBr
b. Br_2
c. KBrO_4 + KCl
d. KBrO_4
*e. KBrO_3
3326. What titrant is used in bromatometric titration?
a. KBrO_4 + KCl
*b. KBrO_3
c. Br_2
d. KBr
e. KBrO_4
3327. What titrimetric method of analysis is used for the quantification of calcium chloride?
a. Cerimetry, direct titration
*b. Permanganatometry, back titration
c. Nitritometry, direct titration
d. Acidimetry, back titration
e. Permanganatometry, direct titration
3328. What titrimetric method of analysis is used for the quantification of calcium chloride?
a. Cerimetry, direct titration
*b. Permanganatometry, back titration
c. Permanganatometry, direct titration
d. Acidimetry, back titration
e. Nitritometry, direct titration
3329. What titrimetric method of analysis is used for the quantification of calcium chloride?
a. Nitritometry, direct titration
b. Acidimetry, back titration
c. Cerimetry, direct titration
d. Permanganatometry, direct titration
*e. Permanganatometry, back titration
3330. What titrimetric method of analysis requires the use of both external and internal indicators?
*a. Nitritometry
b. Alkalimetry
c. Complexometric titration
d. Argentometry
e. Permanganatometry
3331. What titrimetric method of analysis requires the use of both external and internal indicators?
a. Permanganatometry
*b. Nitritometry
c. Argentometry
d. Alkalimetry
e. Complexometric titration
3332. What titrimetric method of analysis requires the use of both external and internal indicators?
a. Permanganatometry
b. Complexometric titration
*c. Nitritometry
d. Alkalimetry
e. Argentometry
3333. What titrimetry method allows to determine quantitative content of ascorbic acid using starch as an indicator?
a. Ferrometry
b. Nitritometry
c. Permanganatometry
d. Titanometry
*e. Iodimetry
3334. What titrimetry method allows to determine quantitative content of ascorbic acid using starch as an indicator?
a. Nitritometry
b. Titanometry
c. Ferrometry
*d. Iodimetry
e. Permanganatometry
3335. What titrimetry method allows to determine quantitative content of ascorbic acid using starch as an indicator?
a. Titanometry
b. Ferrometry
*c. Iodimetry
d. Permanganatometry
e. Nitritometry
3336. What two working solutions are used in determination of hydrogen sulfide in mineral waters by means of iodometry (back titration)?
a. NaOH, HCl
b. Н_2С_2O_4, KMnO_4
c. Na_2CO_3, HCl
*d. I_2, Na_2S_2O_3
e. AgNO_3, H_2SO_4
3337. What two working solutions are used in determination of hydrogen sulfide in mineral waters by means of iodometry (back titration)?
a. Na_2CO_3, HCl
b. NaOH, HCl
*c. I_2, Na_2S_2O_3
d. Н_2С_2O_4, KMnO_4
e. AgNO_3, H_2SO_4
3338. What two working solutions are used in determination of hydrogen sulfide in mineral waters by means of iodometry (back titration)?
a. Na_2CO_3, HCl
b. Н_2С_2O_4, KMnO_4
c. AgNO_3, H_2SO_4
*d. I_2, Na_2S_2O_3
e. NaOH, HCl
3339. What type of colloidal systems are foams?
a. Liquid-solid
b. Liquid-liquid
c. Gas-gas
*d. Gas-liquid
e. Solid-liquid
3340. What type of colloidal systems are foams?
a. Liquid-solid
b. Solid-liquid
*c. Gas-liquid
d. Gas-gas
e. Liquid-liquid
3341. What type of colloidal systems are foams?
a. Solid-liquid
b. Liquid-liquid
c. Gas-gas
d. Liquid-solid
*e. Gas-liquid
3342. What type of conducting bundle is characteristic of primary anatomical structure of a root?
a. Closed collateral
*b. Radial
c. Concentric
d. Bicollateral
e. Open collateral
3343. What type of conducting bundle is characteristic of primary anatomical structure of a root?
a. Open collateral
b. Closed collateral
c. Bicollateral
d. Concentric
*e. Radial
3344. What type of conducting bundle is characteristic of primary anatomical structure of a root?
a. Open collateral
b. Closed collateral
c. Concentric
*d. Radial
e. Bicollateral
3345. What type of gynoecium has several or many free carpels?
*a. Apocarpous
b. Monocarpous
c. Paracarpous
d. Cenocarpous
e. Syncarpous
3346. What type of gynoecium has several or many free carpels?
*a. Apocarpous
b. Syncarpous
c. Monocarpous
d. Paracarpous
e. Cenocarpous
3347. What type of gynoecium has several or many free carpels?
*a. Apocarpous
b. Syncarpous
c. Paracarpous
d. Cenocarpous
e. Monocarpous
3348. What type of parenchyma usually has aleurone or starch grains and droplets of a fatty oil in its cells?
a. Columnar parenchyma
b. Water-storing parenchyma
c. Spongy parenchyma
d. Folded parenchyma
*e. Storage parenchyma
3349. What type of parenchyma usually has aleurone or starch grains and droplets of a fatty oil in its cells?
a. Folded parenchyma
*b. Storage parenchyma
c. Spongy parenchyma
d. Water-storing parenchyma
e. Columnar parenchyma
3350. What type of parenchyma usually has aleurone or starch grains and droplets of a fatty oil in its cells?
a. Water-storing parenchyma
*b. Storage parenchyma
c. Folded parenchyma
d. Columnar parenchyma
e. Spongy parenchyma
3351. What type of proenzyme activation into its active enzyme form is often used in the process of activation of hydrolases in the gastrointestinal tract?
*a. Limited proteolysis
b. Transamination
c. Decarboxylation
d. Phosphorylation
e. Addition of a metal cation
3352. What type of proenzyme activation into its active enzyme form is often used in the process of activation of hydrolases in the gastrointestinal tract?
a. Addition of a metal cation
*b. Limited proteolysis
c. Phosphorylation
d. Decarboxylation
e. Transamination
3353. What type of proenzyme activation into its active enzyme form is often used in the process of activation of hydrolases in the gastrointestinal tract?
a. Phosphorylation
b. Transamination
*c. Limited proteolysis
d. Decarboxylation
e. Addition of a metal cation
3354. What type of solutions can be used as infusion solutions?
*a. Isotonic
b. Hypotonic
c. Hypertonic
d. Ideal
e. Colloid
3355. What type of solutions can be used as infusion solutions?
a. Hypotonic
*b. Isotonic
c. Ideal
d. Hypertonic
e. Colloid
3356. What type of solutions can be used as infusion solutions?
a. Ideal
b. Hypotonic
*c. Isotonic
d. Colloid
e. Hypertonic
3357. What type of tautomerism is characteristic of monosaccharide?
*a. Oxo-cyclo (ring-chain)
b. Keto-enol
c. Aci-nitro
d. Lactam-lactim
e. Azole
3358. What type of tautomerism is characteristic of monosaccharide?
a. Azole
*b. Oxo-cyclo (ring-chain)
c. Keto-enol
d. Lactam-lactim
e. Aci-nitro
3359. What type of tautomerism is characteristic of monosaccharide?
a. Azole
b. Keto-enol
*c. Oxo-cyclo (ring-chain)
d. Lactam-lactim
e. Aci-nitro
3360. What types of fruits are characteristic of the Ericaceae family plants?
a. Achene, nutlet, drupe
*b. Capsule, drupe, berry
c. Cynarrhodium, compound drupe, fraga
d. Legume, single follicle, single nutlet
e. Hesperidium, silique, double-winged samara
3361. What types of fruits are characteristic of the Ericaceae family plants?
a. Hesperidium, silique, double-winged samara
b. Legume, single follicle, single nutlet
c. Cynarrhodium, compound drupe, fraga
d. Achene, nutlet, drupe
*e. Capsule, drupe, berry
3362. What types of fruits are characteristic of the Ericaceae family plants?
a. Legume, single follicle, single nutlet
b. Cynarrhodium, compound drupe, fraga
*c. Capsule, drupe, berry
d. Achene, nutlet, drupe
e. Hesperidium, silique, double-winged samara
3363. What types of inflorescence are characteristic of the Cruciferae family?
*a. Tassel or panicle
b. Corymb or spike
c. Head or umbel
d. Head or corymb
e. Spadix or panicle
3364. What types of inflorescence are characteristic of the Cruciferae family?
*a. Tassel or panicle
b. Spadix or panicle
c. Corymb or spike
d. Head or corymb
e. Head or umbel
3365. What types of inflorescence are characteristic of the Cruciferae family?
a. Head or umbel
b. Spadix or panicle
c. Corymb or spike
d. Head or corymb
*e. Tassel or panicle
3366. What unstratified (or, less often, stratified) tissue in plant stems, roots, and needles has a protective integumentary function and a water-storing function?
a. Epiblem
*b. Hypodermis
c. Periderm
d. Epidermis
e. Exodermis
3367. What unstratified (or, less often, stratified) tissue in plant stems, roots, and needles has a protective integumentary function and a water-storing function?
a. Exodermis
*b. Hypodermis
c. Periderm
d. Epidermis
e. Epiblem
3368. What unstratified (or, less often, stratified) tissue in plant stems, roots, and needles has a protective integumentary function and a water-storing function?
a. Exodermis
b. Epidermis
c. Epiblem
d. Periderm
*e. Hypodermis
3369. What vitamin supplement is typically prescribed along with folic acid in cases of hyperchromic anemia?
*a. Cyanocobalamin
b. Retinol
c. Pyridoxine
d. Fercoven
e. Thiamine
3370. What vitamin supplement is typically prescribed along with folic acid in cases of hyperchromic anemia?
*a. Cyanocobalamin
b. Retinol
c. Pyridoxine
d. Thiamine
e. Fercoven
3371. What vitamin supplement is typically prescribed along with folic acid in cases of hyperchromic anemia?
a. Thiamine
*b. Cyanocobalamin
c. Retinol
d. Pyridoxine
e. Fercoven
3372. What will be the order of the reaction if one of the reagents participating in a bimolecular reaction was taken in a large excess?
a. The order can be determined based on the substance taken in excess
*b. Pseudomonomolecular order
c. The order would be the same as the molecularity
d. The order would be greater than the molecularity
e. Third order
3373. What will be the order of the reaction if one of the reagents participating in a bimolecular reaction was taken in a large excess?
a. The order would be greater than the molecularity
b. The order would be the same as the molecularity
c. The order can be determined based on the substance taken in excess
d. Third order
*e. Pseudomonomolecular order
3374. What will be the order of the reaction if one of the reagents participating in a bimolecular reaction was taken in a large excess?
a. Third order
*b. Pseudomonomolecular order
c. The order would be the same as the molecularity
d. The order can be determined based on the substance taken in excess
e. The order would be greater than the molecularity
3375. What working solutions (titrants) are used in the method of precipitation titration - Volhard method?
*a. AgNO_3 and NH_4SCN
b. HClO_4 and KOH
c. Na_2S_2O_3 and K(I_3)
d. H_2SO_4 and NaOH
e. KMnO_4 and KBrO_3
3376. What working solutions (titrants) are used in the method of precipitation titration - Volhard method?
a. HClO_4 and KOH
b. KMnO_4 and KBrO_3
c. H_2SO_4 and NaOH
*d. AgNO_3 and NH_4SCN
e. Na_2S_2O_3 and K(I_3)
3377. What working solutions (titrants) are used in the method of precipitation titration - Volhard method?
a. Na_2S_2O_3 and K(I_3)
b. KMnO_4 and KBrO_3
*c. AgNO_3 and NH_4SCN
d. H_2SO_4 and NaOH
e. HClO_4 and KOH
3378. Wheat has linear inflorescences with biflorous sessile spikelets arranged in two rows. Name this type of inflorescence:
*a. Compound spike
b. Panicle
c. Corymb
d. Spadix
e. Spike
3379. Wheat has linear inflorescences with biflorous sessile spikelets arranged in two rows. Name this type of inflorescence:
a. Spadix
b. Panicle
*c. Compound spike
d. Spike
e. Corymb
3380. Wheat has linear inflorescences with biflorous sessile spikelets arranged in two rows. Name this type of inflorescence:
a. Spike
*b. Compound spike
c. Panicle
d. Spadix
e. Corymb
3381. When a mixture of electrolytes is added into a sol, one of them reduces the effect of another. Name this phenomenon:
a. Additivity
*b. Antagonism
c. Synergism
d. Rheopexy
e. Phoresis
3382. When a mixture of electrolytes is added into a sol, one of them reduces the effect of another. Name this phenomenon:
a. Additivity
b. Phoresis
c. Synergism
*d. Antagonism
e. Rheopexy
3383. When a mixture of electrolytes is added into a sol, one of them reduces the effect of another. Name this phenomenon:
a. Synergism
b. Additivity
*c. Antagonism
d. Phoresis
e. Rheopexy
3384. When activated carbon is included in the combination therapy, the absorption of the other drugs changes in the following way:
*a. Decreases
b. Remains unchanged
c. Accelerates
d. Activates
e. Increases
3385. When activated carbon is included in the combination therapy, the absorption of the other drugs changes in the following way:
a. Accelerates
b. Activates
*c. Decreases
d. Remains unchanged
e. Increases
3386. When activated carbon is included in the combination therapy, the absorption of the other drugs changes in the following way:
a. Increases
b. Activates
c. Accelerates
d. Remains unchanged
*e. Decreases
3387. When an isolated system spontaneously approaches its equilibrium, its entropy:
a. Approaches infinity
b. Reaches maximum
c. Demonstrates linear magnification
*d. Approaches zero
e. Reaches minimum
3388. When an isolated system spontaneously approaches its equilibrium, its entropy:
a. Reaches minimum
b. Reaches maximum
c. Demonstrates linear magnification
*d. Approaches zero
e. Approaches infinity
3389. When an isolated system spontaneously approaches its equilibrium, its entropy:
a. Reaches minimum
b. Reaches maximum
c. Demonstrates linear magnification
d. Approaches infinity
*e. Approaches zero
3390. When determining oxidizing agents by means of iodometry in the presence of starch the following phenomenon can be observed at the titration endpoint:
a. Green coloring of solution disappears
b. Red coloring appears
c. Green coloring of precipitate appears
d. White precipitate forms
*e. Blue coloring disappears
3391. When determining oxidizing agents by means of iodometry in the presence of starch the following phenomenon can be observed at the titration endpoint:
a. Red coloring appears
*b. Blue coloring disappears
c. White precipitate forms
d. Green coloring of solution disappears
e. Green coloring of precipitate appears
3392. When determining oxidizing agents by means of iodometry in the presence of starch the following phenomenon can be observed at the titration endpoint:
a. White precipitate forms
b. Red coloring appears
c. Green coloring of precipitate appears
d. Green coloring of solution disappears
*e. Blue coloring disappears
3393. When determining substances by means of mercurimetric titration, the following solution is used as a titrant:
*a. Mercury(II) nitrate
b. Mercury(I) nitrate
c. Ammonium thiocyanate
d. Silver(I) nitrate
e. Potassium iodide
3394. When determining substances by means of mercurimetric titration, the following solution is used as a titrant:
a. Mercury(I) nitrate
*b. Mercury(II) nitrate
c. Ammonium thiocyanate
d. Silver(I) nitrate
e. Potassium iodide
3395. When determining substances by means of mercurimetric titration, the following solution is used as a titrant:
a. Potassium iodide
b. Ammonium thiocyanate
c. Silver(I) nitrate
d. Mercury(I) nitrate
*e. Mercury(II) nitrate
3396. When dividing cations into analytical groups according to the acid-base classification, the group reagents can be acids or bases. What acids are used as group reagents?
*a. HCl, H_2SO_4
b. HClO_4
c. H_2CO_3
d. H_3PO_4, H_2C_2O_4
e. HNO_3, CH_3COOH
3397. When dividing cations into analytical groups according to the acid-base classification, the group reagents can be acids or bases. What acids are used as group reagents?
*a. HCl, H_2SO_4
b. HClO_4
c. H_3PO_4, H_2C_2O_4
d. HNO_3, CH_3COOH
e. H_2CO_3
3398. When dividing cations into analytical groups according to the acid-base classification, the group reagents can be acids or bases. What acids are used as group reagents?
a. HNO_3, CH_3COOH
*b. HCl, H_2SO_4
c. HClO_4
d. H_3PO_4, H_2C_2O_4
e. H_2CO_3
3399. When do order and molecularity of chemical reactions coincide?
*a. In simple one-stage reactions only
b. In complex multi-stage reactions only
c. Always coincide
d. Never coincide
e. In enzymatic reactions
3400. When do order and molecularity of chemical reactions coincide?
a. Always coincide
b. In complex multi-stage reactions only
c. In enzymatic reactions
d. Never coincide
*e. In simple one-stage reactions only
3401. When do order and molecularity of chemical reactions coincide?
a. In enzymatic reactions
b. In complex multi-stage reactions only
*c. In simple one-stage reactions only
d. Always coincide
e. Never coincide
3402. When dosage forms are being tested by accelerated aging method, it is assumed that decomposition reaction of the active substance is of the following order:
a. Reaction order does not matter
b. Third-order
*c. First-order
d. Second-order
e. Zero-order
3403. When dosage forms are being tested by accelerated aging method, it is assumed that decomposition reaction of the active substance is of the following order:
a. Third-order
b. Zero-order
*c. First-order
d. Reaction order does not matter
e. Second-order
3404. When dosage forms are being tested by accelerated aging method, it is assumed that decomposition reaction of the active substance is of the following order:
a. Zero-order
b. Second-order
c. Reaction order does not matter
*d. First-order
e. Third-order
3405. When food products are thermally processed, the spatial structure of the proteins changes. This process is called:
*a. Denaturation
b. Hydration
c. Renaturation
d. Salting out
e. Dialysis
3406. When food products are thermally processed, the spatial structure of the proteins changes. This process is called:
a. Dialysis
b. Renaturation
*c. Denaturation
d. Salting out
e. Hydration
3407. When food products are thermally processed, the spatial structure of the proteins changes. This process is called:
a. Renaturation
b. Hydration
*c. Denaturation
d. Dialysis
e. Salting out
3408. When herbal raw material of  Calendula officinalis and  Matricaria chamomilla is being harvested, inflorescences of the following type are being collected:
a. Corymb
b. Spike
c. Capitulum
*d. Anthodium
e. Umbel
3409. When herbal raw material of  Calendula officinalis and  Matricaria chamomilla is being harvested, inflorescences of the following type are being collected:
a. Spike
b. Capitulum
*c. Anthodium
d. Umbel
e. Corymb
3410. When herbal raw material of  Calendula officinalis and  Matricaria chamomilla is being harvested, inflorescences of the following type are being collected:
a. Spike
b. Umbel
c. Capitulum
d. Corymb
*e. Anthodium
3411. When hydrogen peroxide solution is administered to bleeding wounds, it is broken up by one of the blood enzymes. Point out this enzyme:
a. Aspartate aminotransferase
*b. Catalase
c. Cytochrome oxidase
d. Monoamine oxidase
e. Lactate dehydrogenase
3412. When hydrogen peroxide solution is administered to bleeding wounds, it is broken up by one of the blood enzymes. Point out this enzyme:
a. Aspartate aminotransferase
*b. Catalase
c. Monoamine oxidase
d. Cytochrome oxidase
e. Lactate dehydrogenase
3413. When hydrogen peroxide solution is administered to bleeding wounds, it is broken up by one of the blood enzymes. Point out this enzyme:
a. Lactate dehydrogenase
b. Aspartate aminotransferase
c. Cytochrome oxidase
*d. Catalase
e. Monoamine oxidase
3414. When measuring the antimicrobial activity of drugs, their minimum concentration that suppresses the growth of microbes must be determined. What is this parameter?
*a. The lowest drug concentration that inhibits growth of a bacterial test culture
b. The lowest drug concentration that causes development of selective strains of test cultures
c. The lowest drug concentration that has a bactericidal effect
d. The lowest drug concentration that inhibits enzyme biosynthesis in the macroorganism
e. -
3415. When measuring the antimicrobial activity of drugs, their minimum concentration that suppresses the growth of microbes must be determined. What is this parameter?
a. The lowest drug concentration that causes development of selective strains of test cultures
*b. The lowest drug concentration that inhibits growth of a bacterial test culture
c. The lowest drug concentration that has a bactericidal effect
d. -
e. The lowest drug concentration that inhibits enzyme biosynthesis in the macroorganism
3416. When measuring the antimicrobial activity of drugs, their minimum concentration that suppresses the growth of microbes must be determined. What is this parameter?
a. The lowest drug concentration that inhibits enzyme biosynthesis in the macroorganism
b. -
c. The lowest drug concentration that causes development of selective strains of test cultures
d. The lowest drug concentration that has a bactericidal effect
*e. The lowest drug concentration that inhibits growth of a bacterial test culture
3417. When protective action of proteins weakens, cholesterol accumulates on the vessel walls because its particles become glued together. Name this phenomenon:
*a. Coagulation
b. Thixotropy
c. Sensitization
d. Sedimentation
e. Synergism
3418. When protective action of proteins weakens, cholesterol accumulates on the vessel walls because its particles become glued together. Name this phenomenon:
a. Sedimentation
*b. Coagulation
c. Sensitization
d. Synergism
e. Thixotropy
3419. When protective action of proteins weakens, cholesterol accumulates on the vessel walls because its particles become glued together. Name this phenomenon:
a. Sensitization
b. Thixotropy
c. Synergism
d. Sedimentation
*e. Coagulation
3420. When smeared with turpentine, the rabbit's tongue turns red and its blood supply increases. What type of arterial hyperemia occurs in this case?
a. Metabolic hyperemia
b. Work hyperemia
c. Neuroparalytic hyperemia
*d. Neurotonic hyperemia
e. Reactive hyperemia
3421. When smeared with turpentine, the rabbit's tongue turns red and its blood supply increases. What type of arterial hyperemia occurs in this case?
a. Work hyperemia
*b. Neurotonic hyperemia
c. Reactive hyperemia
d. Neuroparalytic hyperemia
e. Metabolic hyperemia
3422. When smeared with turpentine, the rabbit's tongue turns red and its blood supply increases. What type of arterial hyperemia occurs in this case?
a. Work hyperemia
b. Reactive hyperemia
c. Metabolic hyperemia
*d. Neurotonic hyperemia
e. Neuroparalytic hyperemia
3423. When studying a herbarium specimen of Persicaria maculosa, the following diagnostic sign, characteristic of all Polygonaceae family representatives, was noted:
a. Compound leaves
b. Essential oil glands
*c. Ochrea
d. Legume fruits
e. No petioles
3424. When studying a herbarium specimen of Persicaria maculosa, the following diagnostic sign, characteristic of all Polygonaceae family representatives, was noted:
a. Essential oil glands
*b. Ochrea
c. Compound leaves
d. No petioles
e. Legume fruits
3425. When studying a herbarium specimen of Persicaria maculosa, the following diagnostic sign, characteristic of all Polygonaceae family representatives, was noted:
a. Legume fruits
b. Compound leaves
c. Essential oil glands
*d. Ochrea
e. No petioles
3426. When studying five herbarium specimens of medicinal plants, it was determined that one of them belongs to Fabaceae family. Which one is it?
*a. Ononis arvensis
b. Hyoscyamus niger
c. Datura stramonium
d. Solanum dulcamara
e. Atropa belladonna
3427. When studying five herbarium specimens of medicinal plants, it was determined that one of them belongs to Fabaceae family. Which one is it?
a. Atropa belladonna
b. Datura stramonium
c. Hyoscyamus niger
*d. Ononis arvensis
e. Solanum dulcamara
3428. When studying five herbarium specimens of medicinal plants, it was determined that one of them belongs to Fabaceae family. Which one is it?
a. Hyoscyamus niger
b. Datura stramonium
*c. Ononis arvensis
d. Atropa belladonna
e. Solanum dulcamara
3429. When working in the garden, a man accidentally cut his hand. The wound remained untreated. Shortly after that the wounded area developed inflammation with accumulation of exudate that contained numerous viable and degenerate neutrophils. What type of exudate is it?
*a. Purulent
b. Hemorrhagic
c. Serous
d. Catarrhal
e. Fibrinous
3430. When working in the garden, a man accidentally cut his hand. The wound remained untreated. Shortly after that the wounded area developed inflammation with accumulation of exudate that contained numerous viable and degenerate neutrophils. What type of exudate is it?
*a. Purulent
b. Serous
c. Fibrinous
d. Catarrhal
e. Hemorrhagic
3431. When working in the garden, a man accidentally cut his hand. The wound remained untreated. Shortly after that the wounded area developed inflammation with accumulation of exudate that contained numerous viable and degenerate neutrophils. What type of exudate is it?
*a. Purulent
b. Serous
c. Hemorrhagic
d. Fibrinous
e. Catarrhal
3432. Which alkadiene of those listed below is a diene with cumulated double bonds?
a. CH_2 = CH - CH = CH_2
*b. CH_2 = C = CH_2
c. CH_2 = CH - CH_2 - CH = CH_2
d. CH_2 = CH - CH_2 - CH_2 - CH = CH_2
e. CH_3 - CH = CH - CH_2 - CH = CH_2
3433. Which alkadiene of those listed below is a diene with cumulated double bonds?
a. CH_2 = CH - CH = CH_2
b. CH_2 = CH - CH_2 - CH = CH_2
c. CH_3 - CH = CH - CH_2 - CH = CH_2
*d. CH_2 = C = CH_2
e. CH_2 = CH - CH_2 - CH_2 - CH = CH_2
3434. Which alkadiene of those listed below is a diene with cumulated double bonds?
a. CH_2 = CH - CH_2 - CH = CH_2
*b. CH_2 = C = CH_2
c. CH_3 - CH = CH - CH_2 - CH = CH_2
d. CH_2 = CH - CH = CH_2
e. CH_2 = CH - CH_2 - CH_2 - CH = CH_2
3435. Which compound has the most markedly expressed basic properties?
a. CH_3CH_2OH
b. CH_3CH_2SH
*c. CH_3CH_2NH_2
d. CH_3COOH
e. CHequiv CH
3436. Which compound has the most markedly expressed basic properties?
a. CH_3CH_2SH
b. CH_3CH_2OH
c. CHequiv CH
d. CH_3COOH
*e. CH_3CH_2NH_2
3437. Which compound has the most markedly expressed basic properties?
a. CHequiv CH
b. CH_3CH_2OH
*c. CH_3CH_2NH_2
d. CH_3COOH
e. CH_3CH_2SH
3438. Which medicine of those listed below is the least active among the local anesthetics, poorly dissolves in water, and can be used for topical anesthesia in the form of ointments, pastes, and powders?
a. Lidocaine
b. Novocaine (Procaine)
c. Ropivacaine
d. Ultracaine (Articaine)
*e. Anesthesin (Benzocaine)
3439. Which medicine of those listed below is the least active among the local anesthetics, poorly dissolves in water, and can be used for topical anesthesia in the form of ointments, pastes, and powders?
a. Lidocaine
b. Novocaine (Procaine)
c. Ultracaine (Articaine)
d. Ropivacaine
*e. Anesthesin (Benzocaine)
3440. Which medicine of those listed below is the least active among the local anesthetics, poorly dissolves in water, and can be used for topical anesthesia in the form of ointments, pastes, and powders?
a. Novocaine (Procaine)
b. Ropivacaine
c. Ultracaine (Articaine)
d. Lidocaine
*e. Anesthesin (Benzocaine)
3441. Which of the amines listed below is a primary amine?
a. C_6H_5CH_2N(CH_3)_2
b. C_6H_5CH_2NHCH_3
c. C_6H_5N(CH_3)_2
d. C_6H_5NHCH_3
*e. C_6H_5CH_2NH_2
3442. Which of the amines listed below is a primary amine?
a. C_6H_5CH_2NHCH_3
b. C_6H_5NHCH_3
c. C_6H_5CH_2N(CH_3)_2
*d. C_6H_5CH_2NH_2
e. C_6H_5N(CH_3)_2
3443. Which of the amines listed below is a primary amine?
a. C_6H_5NHCH_3
b. C_6H_5N(CH_3)_2
*c. C_6H_5CH_2NH_2
d. C_6H_5CH_2N(CH_3)_2
e. C_6H_5CH_2NHCH_3
3444. Which of the drugs listed below quickly arrests angina pectoris attack when taken sublingually?
a. Amiodarone
*b. Nitroglycerine
c. Convallariae glycoside
d. Digoxin
e. Lisinopril
3445. Which of the drugs listed below quickly arrests angina pectoris attack when taken sublingually?
a. Amiodarone
*b. Nitroglycerine
c. Digoxin
d. Lisinopril
e. Convallariae glycoside
3446. Which of the drugs listed below quickly arrests angina pectoris attack when taken sublingually?
a. Convallariae glycoside
b. Digoxin
c. Amiodarone
d. Lisinopril
*e. Nitroglycerine
3447. Which of the following compounds is a complex ether (an ester)?
a. CH_3-O-C_2H_5
*b. CH_3COOCH_3
c. C_15H_31COOH
d. C_2H_5OH
e. CH_3-O-CH_3
3448. Which of the following compounds is a complex ether (an ester)?
a. CH_3-O-C_2H_5
*b. CH_3COOCH_3
c. C_2H_5OH
d. C_15H_31COOH
e. CH_3-O-CH_3
3449. Which of the following compounds is a complex ether (an ester)?
a. C_15H_31COOH
b. CH_3-O-CH_3
c. C_2H_5OH
*d. CH_3COOCH_3
e. CH_3-O-C_2H_5
3450. Which of the following reactions is required in order to obtain an azo dye out of an aromatic amine?
a. Alkylation and nitrosation
*b. Diazotization and azo compound
c. Reduction and diazotization
d. Salt formation and nitration
e. Diazotization and interaction with potassium cyanide
3451. Which of the following reactions is required in order to obtain an azo dye out of an aromatic amine?
a. Alkylation and nitrosation
b. Reduction and diazotization
c. Salt formation and nitration
d. Diazotization and interaction with potassium cyanide
*e. Diazotization and azo compound
3452. Which of the following reactions is required in order to obtain an azo dye out of an aromatic amine?
a. Salt formation and nitration
b. Alkylation and nitrosation
c. Reduction and diazotization
d. Diazotization and interaction with potassium cyanide
*e. Diazotization and azo compound
3453. Which of the given reactions produces ethane as a result?
*a. [CH_2=CH_2xrightarrow[t^o, p]H_2, кат.]
b. [C_2H_5OHxrightarrow[]k.H_2SO_4, t^o]
c. [Al_4C_3xrightarrow[]H_2O]
d. [CO + 2H_2xrightarrow[]Fe, t^o]
e. -
3454. Which of the given reactions produces ethane as a result?
a. [CO + 2H_2xrightarrow[]Fe, t^o]
*b. [CH_2=CH_2xrightarrow[t^o, p]H_2, кат.]
c. [C_2H_5OHxrightarrow[]k.H_2SO_4, t^o]
d. -
e. [Al_4C_3xrightarrow[]H_2O]
3455. Which of the given reactions produces ethane as a result?
a. [C_2H_5OHxrightarrow[]k.H_2SO_4, t^o]
b. -
c. [Al_4C_3xrightarrow[]H_2O]
*d. [CH_2=CH_2xrightarrow[t^o, p]H_2, кат.]
e. [CO + 2H_2xrightarrow[]Fe, t^o]
3456. Which one of the listed drugs can be used to treat candidiasis?
*a. Nystatin
b. Azithromycin
c. Ceftriaxone
d. Clindamycin
e. Doxycycline
3457. Which one of the listed drugs can be used to treat candidiasis?
a. Ceftriaxone
b. Azithromycin
*c. Nystatin
d. Clindamycin
e. Doxycycline
3458. Which one of the listed drugs can be used to treat candidiasis?
a. Doxycycline
b. Clindamycin
c. Ceftriaxone
*d. Nystatin
e. Azithromycin
3459. Which one of the listed ions has the greatest mobility?
*a. Н_3О^+
b. CN^-
c. K^+
d. Сl^-
e. Na^+
3460. Which one of the listed ions has the greatest mobility?
a. Сl^-
*b. Н_3О^+
c. CN^-
d. Na^+
e. K^+
3461. Which one of the substances listed below is not a surfactant?
a. 1-Pentanol
b. Sodium palmitate
*c. Sodium chloride
d. Sodium oleate
e. Sodium stearate
3462. Which one of the substances listed below is not a surfactant?
a. Sodium palmitate
b. 1-Pentanol
*c. Sodium chloride
d. Sodium stearate
e. Sodium oleate
3463. Which one of the substances listed below is not a surfactant?
a. Sodium palmitate
b. 1-Pentanol
c. Sodium oleate
*d. Sodium chloride
e. Sodium stearate
3464. Which pair of substances can produce an emulsion when mixed together?
*a. Soybean oil and water
b. Urea and water
c. Silicon dioxide and water
d. Silver nitrate and water
e. Menthol and camphor
3465. Which pair of substances can produce an emulsion when mixed together?
a. Silver nitrate and water
b. Urea and water
c. Silicon dioxide and water
*d. Soybean oil and water
e. Menthol and camphor
3466. Which pair of substances can produce an emulsion when mixed together?
a. Urea and water
b. Silicon dioxide and water
*c. Soybean oil and water
d. Menthol and camphor
e. Silver nitrate and water
3467. Which phenomenon is uncharacteristic of aerosols?
a. Coagulation
b. Thermophoresis
c. Photophoresis
d. Thermoprecipitation
*e. Dissociation
3468. Which phenomenon is uncharacteristic of aerosols?
a. Thermophoresis
b. Thermoprecipitation
c. Coagulation
d. Photophoresis
*e. Dissociation
3469. Which phenomenon is uncharacteristic of aerosols?
a. Thermoprecipitation
*b. Dissociation
c. Coagulation
d. Photophoresis
e. Thermophoresis
3470. While on a tour, the students have been collecting summer shoots of Equiseti arvensis that were hard to the touch. What type of the outer shell is characteristic of the epidermal cells of this plant?
a. Lignified
b. Cutinized
*c. Mineralized
d. Slimified
e. Suberinized
3471. While on a tour, the students have been collecting summer shoots of Equiseti arvensis that were hard to the touch. What type of the outer shell is characteristic of the epidermal cells of this plant?
a. Slimified
*b. Mineralized
c. Cutinized
d. Lignified
e. Suberinized
3472. While on a tour, the students have been collecting summer shoots of Equiseti arvensis that were hard to the touch. What type of the outer shell is characteristic of the epidermal cells of this plant?
a. Slimified
*b. Mineralized
c. Lignified
d. Cutinized
e. Suberinized
3473. Why do alcohols have higher boiling points as compared to their isomeric ethers?
a. Ability to participate in electrophilic substitution reactions
b. Dehydration ability of alcohols
c. Ether ability to form associates
*d. Formation of intermolecular hydrogen bonds
e. Increased molecular weight
3474. Why do alcohols have higher boiling points as compared to their isomeric ethers?
a. Dehydration ability of alcohols
*b. Formation of intermolecular hydrogen bonds
c. Ether ability to form associates
d. Increased molecular weight
e. Ability to participate in electrophilic substitution reactions
3475. Why do alcohols have higher boiling points as compared to their isomeric ethers?
a. Ether ability to form associates
b. Increased molecular weight
c. Ability to participate in electrophilic substitution reactions
d. Dehydration ability of alcohols
*e. Formation of intermolecular hydrogen bonds
3476. With which of the following compounds does propane react under the given conditions?
a. AlCl_3
b. Br_2, in the dark, 20^oC
*c. Br_2, in the light, 20^oC
d. Diluted H_2SO_4, 20^oC
e. SO_2 + Cl_2, in the dark
3477. With which of the following compounds does propane react under the given conditions?
a. AlCl_3
b. SO_2 + Cl_2, in the dark
c. Br_2, in the dark, 20^oC
d. Diluted H_2SO_4, 20^oC
*e. Br_2, in the light, 20^oC
3478. With which of the following compounds does propane react under the given conditions?
a. SO_2 + Cl_2, in the dark
b. Br_2, in the dark, 20^oC
c. Diluted H_2SO_4, 20^oC
*d. Br_2, in the light, 20^oC
e. AlCl_3
3479. You are a hospital pharmacist. Consult the pediatrician, what group of antibiotics is contraindicated for children due to their effect on formation of the bone tissue:
*a. Tetracyclines
b. Glucocorticoids
c. Macrolides
d. Penicillins
e. Aminoglycosides
3480. You are a hospital pharmacist. Consult the pediatrician, what group of antibiotics is contraindicated for children due to their effect on formation of the bone tissue:
*a. Tetracyclines
b. Penicillins
c. Aminoglycosides
d. Glucocorticoids
e. Macrolides
3481. You are a hospital pharmacist. Consult the pediatrician, what group of antibiotics is contraindicated for children due to their effect on formation of the bone tissue:
*a. Tetracyclines
b. Penicillins
c. Macrolides
d. Aminoglycosides
e. Glucocorticoids
