1. "Balance" accounting form consists of two parts  -  assets and liabilities. Select from the list only the liabilities.
*a. Bank loan, accounts payable
b. Accounts receivable, prepaid expenses
c. Authorized capital, fixed assets
d. Fixed assets, accounts receivable
e. Retained earnings, intangible assets
2. "Balance" accounting form consists of two parts  -  assets and liabilities. Select from the list only the liabilities.
a. Fixed assets, accounts receivable
b. Accounts receivable, prepaid expenses
c. Authorized capital, fixed assets
d. Retained earnings, intangible assets
*e. Bank loan, accounts payable
3. "Balance" accounting form consists of two parts  -  assets and liabilities. Select from the list only the liabilities.
a. Retained earnings, intangible assets
b. Accounts receivable, prepaid expenses
c. Authorized capital, fixed assets
*d. Bank loan, accounts payable
e. Fixed assets, accounts receivable
4. ''Avicenna'', a newly founded pharmaceutical company, operates round-the-clock. What employees cannot be assigned to night shifts?
*a. Employees under 18 (underage)
b. -
c. Employees under 30
d. Employees under 25
e. Employees of retirement age
5. ''Avicenna'', a newly founded pharmaceutical company, operates round-the-clock. What employees cannot be assigned to night shifts?
a. -
b. Employees of retirement age
c. Employees under 30
*d. Employees under 18 (underage)
e. Employees under 25
6. ''Avicenna'', a newly founded pharmaceutical company, operates round-the-clock. What employees cannot be assigned to night shifts?
a. Employees under 30
*b. Employees under 18 (underage)
c. Employees under 25
d. -
e. Employees of retirement age
7. ''Immunal'' immunostimulant is often prescribed against chronic upper respiratory tract infections. What herbal raw material is used in its production?
*a. Herba Echinaceae purpurea
b. Radices Rhei
c. Rhizomata et radices Eleuterococci
d. Radices Araliae elata
e. Radices Ginseng
8. ''Immunal'' immunostimulant is often prescribed against chronic upper respiratory tract infections. What herbal raw material is used in its production?
*a. Herba Echinaceae purpurea
b. Radices Rhei
c. Rhizomata et radices Eleuterococci
d. Radices Ginseng
e. Radices Araliae elata
9. ''Immunal'' immunostimulant is often prescribed against chronic upper respiratory tract infections. What herbal raw material is used in its production?
a. Radices Ginseng
b. Radices Araliae elata
c. Radices Rhei
*d. Herba Echinaceae purpurea
e. Rhizomata et radices Eleuterococci
10. ''Novo-Passit'' preparation is used as a sedative. It is manufactured from the following herbal raw material:
*a. Passiflora grass
b. Acorus calamus rhizomes
c. Populus nigra buds
d. Taraxacum roots
e. Viburnum bark
11. ''Novo-Passit'' preparation is used as a sedative. It is manufactured from the following herbal raw material:
*a. Passiflora grass
b. Acorus calamus rhizomes
c. Taraxacum roots
d. Viburnum bark
e. Populus nigra buds
12. ''Novo-Passit'' preparation is used as a sedative. It is manufactured from the following herbal raw material:
*a. Passiflora grass
b. Populus nigra buds
c. Viburnum bark
d. Taraxacum roots
e. Acorus calamus rhizomes
13. 1,8-cineole is a bactericidal component of essential oil. Specify the medicinal herb that is grown in Ukraine and contains 1,8-cineole in its essential oil:
*a. Salvia officinalis
b. Origanum vulgare
c. Inula helenium
d. Juniperus communis
e. Eucalyptus globulus
14. 1,8-cineole is a bactericidal component of essential oil. Specify the medicinal herb that is grown in Ukraine and contains 1,8-cineole in its essential oil:
a. Inula helenium
b. Juniperus communis
*c. Salvia officinalis
d. Eucalyptus globulus
e. Origanum vulgare
15. 1,8-cineole is a bactericidal component of essential oil. Specify the medicinal herb that is grown in Ukraine and contains 1,8-cineole in its essential oil:
a. Origanum vulgare
b. Inula helenium
c. Juniperus communis
*d. Salvia officinalis
e. Eucalyptus globulus
16. 50 ml of injection solution has been made in a pharmacy. Specify the process of solution sterilization:
a. 140^oC - 12 minutes
*b. 120^oC - 8 minutes
c. 110^oC - 15 minutes
d. 160^oC - 15 minutes
e. 180^oC - 30 minutes
17. 50 ml of injection solution has been made in a pharmacy. Specify the process of solution sterilization:
a. 160^oC - 15 minutes
b. 110^oC - 15 minutes
c. 180^oC - 30 minutes
*d. 120^oC - 8 minutes
e. 140^oC - 12 minutes
18. 50 ml of injection solution has been made in a pharmacy. Specify the process of solution sterilization:
a. 180^oC - 30 minutes
*b. 120^oC - 8 minutes
c. 140^oC - 12 minutes
d. 160^oC - 15 minutes
e. 110^oC - 15 minutes
19. A ''Sunrise'' pharmacy chain has changed the placement of medical products on its shelves and in the shop windows, to study what effect would this merchandising tactics have on the sales amount. What method of marketing research was used by this pharmacy chain?
*a. Experiment
b. Panel
c. Observation
d. -
e. Survey
20. A ''Sunrise'' pharmacy chain has changed the placement of medical products on its shelves and in the shop windows, to study what effect would this merchandising tactics have on the sales amount. What method of marketing research was used by this pharmacy chain?
*a. Experiment
b. Panel
c. Survey
d. -
e. Observation
21. A ''Sunrise'' pharmacy chain has changed the placement of medical products on its shelves and in the shop windows, to study what effect would this merchandising tactics have on the sales amount. What method of marketing research was used by this pharmacy chain?
*a. Experiment
b. Panel
c. Survey
d. Observation
e. -
22. A 10-year-old child was prescribed an antibiotic to treat pneumonia, after which the mother noticed deterioration of the child's hearing. What group of antibiotics could have caused such a complication?
*a. Aminoglycosides
b. Cephalosporins
c. Macrolides
d. Penicillins
e. Fluoroquinolones
23. A 10-year-old child was prescribed an antibiotic to treat pneumonia, after which the mother noticed deterioration of the child's hearing. What group of antibiotics could have caused such a complication?
*a. Aminoglycosides
b. Fluoroquinolones
c. Penicillins
d. Cephalosporins
e. Macrolides
24. A 10-year-old child was prescribed an antibiotic to treat pneumonia, after which the mother noticed deterioration of the child's hearing. What group of antibiotics could have caused such a complication?
a. Macrolides
*b. Aminoglycosides
c. Penicillins
d. Fluoroquinolones
e. Cephalosporins
25. A 12-year-old girl has been diagnosed with acute pyelonephritis. What antibacterial agent has an age limit for its prescription to a patient?
*a. Levofloxacin
b. Cefuroxime
c. Amoxicillin
d. Benzylpenicillin sodium salt
e. Clarithromycin
26. A 12-year-old girl has been diagnosed with acute pyelonephritis. What antibacterial agent has an age limit for its prescription to a patient?
a. Amoxicillin
b. Benzylpenicillin sodium salt
c. Cefuroxime
d. Clarithromycin
*e. Levofloxacin
27. A 12-year-old girl has been diagnosed with acute pyelonephritis. What antibacterial agent has an age limit for its prescription to a patient?
a. Cefuroxime
*b. Levofloxacin
c. Amoxicillin
d. Clarithromycin
e. Benzylpenicillin sodium salt
28. A 24-year-old man suffers from exacerbation of chronic bronchitis. This condition is accompanied by production of a small amount of viscous sputum. What drug is indicated to facilitate the expectoration in this case?
a. Budesonide
b. Ipratropium bromide
*c. Acetylcysteine
d. Oxeladin
e. Fenoterol
29. A 24-year-old man suffers from exacerbation of chronic bronchitis. This condition is accompanied by production of a small amount of viscous sputum. What drug is indicated to facilitate the expectoration in this case?
a. Fenoterol
b. Ipratropium bromide
c. Oxeladin
d. Budesonide
*e. Acetylcysteine
30. A 24-year-old man suffers from exacerbation of chronic bronchitis. This condition is accompanied by production of a small amount of viscous sputum. What drug is indicated to facilitate the expectoration in this case?
a. Oxeladin
b. Fenoterol
c. Ipratropium bromide
*d. Acetylcysteine
e. Budesonide
31. A 24-year-old patient after a thorough examination was diagnosed with type 1 diabetes mellitus for the first time. What antihyperglycemic agent should be prescribed in this case?
a. Etacrynic acid
*b. Insulin
c. Glibenclamide
d. Metformin
e. Urea
32. A 24-year-old patient after a thorough examination was diagnosed with type 1 diabetes mellitus for the first time. What antihyperglycemic agent should be prescribed in this case?
a. Etacrynic acid
b. Glibenclamide
c. Urea
*d. Insulin
e. Metformin
33. A 24-year-old patient after a thorough examination was diagnosed with type 1 diabetes mellitus for the first time. What antihyperglycemic agent should be prescribed in this case?
a. Etacrynic acid
b. Urea
*c. Insulin
d. Metformin
e. Glibenclamide
34. A 25-year-old man is diagnosed with acute pyelonephritis of moderate severity. What drugs should be prescribed for etiotropic therapy?
a. Antiarrhythmic drugs
b. Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs
*c. Antimicrobial agents
d. Anticholinesterase drugs
e. Glucocorticoids
35. A 25-year-old man is diagnosed with acute pyelonephritis of moderate severity. What drugs should be prescribed for etiotropic therapy?
a. Glucocorticoids
b. Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs
c. Antiarrhythmic drugs
*d. Antimicrobial agents
e. Anticholinesterase drugs
36. A 25-year-old man is diagnosed with acute pyelonephritis of moderate severity. What drugs should be prescribed for etiotropic therapy?
a. Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs
b. Anticholinesterase drugs
c. Antiarrhythmic drugs
d. Glucocorticoids
*e. Antimicrobial agents
37. A 25-year-old woman is in the third trimester of her pregnancy. During her regular examination, US detected a malformation in the fetus. Medical history of the patient shows that she was taking large doses of diazepam without prescription during her pregnancy. What type of side effect has occurred in this case?
*a. Teratogenic
b. Carcinogenic
c. Fetotoxic
d. Embryotoxic
e. Mutagenic
38. A 25-year-old woman is in the third trimester of her pregnancy. During her regular examination, US detected a malformation in the fetus. Medical history of the patient shows that she was taking large doses of diazepam without prescription during her pregnancy. What type of side effect has occurred in this case?
*a. Teratogenic
b. Embryotoxic
c. Mutagenic
d. Carcinogenic
e. Fetotoxic
39. A 25-year-old woman is in the third trimester of her pregnancy. During her regular examination, US detected a malformation in the fetus. Medical history of the patient shows that she was taking large doses of diazepam without prescription during her pregnancy. What type of side effect has occurred in this case?
a. Embryotoxic
b. Mutagenic
c. Fetotoxic
*d. Teratogenic
e. Carcinogenic
40. A 28-year-old pregnant woman (8-9 weeks) after clinical examination and laboratory analysis was diagnosed with acute pyelonephritis. What empiric antibacterial therapy will be optimal in this case?
*a. Amoxicillin
b. Tetracycline
c. Norfloxacin
d. Gentamicin
e. Chloramphenicol
41. A 28-year-old pregnant woman (8-9 weeks) after clinical examination and laboratory analysis was diagnosed with acute pyelonephritis. What empiric antibacterial therapy will be optimal in this case?
a. Gentamicin
*b. Amoxicillin
c. Tetracycline
d. Norfloxacin
e. Chloramphenicol
42. A 28-year-old pregnant woman (8-9 weeks) after clinical examination and laboratory analysis was diagnosed with acute pyelonephritis. What empiric antibacterial therapy will be optimal in this case?
a. Norfloxacin
*b. Amoxicillin
c. Tetracycline
d. Gentamicin
e. Chloramphenicol
43. A 28-year-old woman came to a pharmacy complaining of constipation that developed after antacid treatment. What drug could be the cause of this symptom?
*a. Aluminium-containing drugs
b. Ranitidine
c. Simethicone
d. Calcium carbonate
e. Magnesium-containing drugs
44. A 28-year-old woman came to a pharmacy complaining of constipation that developed after antacid treatment. What drug could be the cause of this symptom?
*a. Aluminium-containing drugs
b. Simethicone
c. Magnesium-containing drugs
d. Ranitidine
e. Calcium carbonate
45. A 28-year-old woman came to a pharmacy complaining of constipation that developed after antacid treatment. What drug could be the cause of this symptom?
a. Ranitidine
b. Magnesium-containing drugs
*c. Aluminium-containing drugs
d. Calcium carbonate
e. Simethicone
46. A 3-year-old child is intolerant to paracetamol. What antipyretic drug can be taken instead?
a. Diclofenac sodium
b. Acetylsalicylic acid
c. Naproxen
d. Nimesulide
*e. Ibuprofen
47. A 3-year-old child is intolerant to paracetamol. What antipyretic drug can be taken instead?
a. Diclofenac sodium
b. Naproxen
c. Nimesulide
d. Acetylsalicylic acid
*e. Ibuprofen
48. A 3-year-old child is intolerant to paracetamol. What antipyretic drug can be taken instead?
a. Nimesulide
*b. Ibuprofen
c. Diclofenac sodium
d. Acetylsalicylic acid
e. Naproxen
49. A 35-year-old patient has been prescribed a potassium-sparing diuretic. Select one such drug from the list:
a. Diltiazem
b. Furosemide
*c. Triamterene
d. Bisoprolol
e. Prazosin
50. A 35-year-old patient has been prescribed a potassium-sparing diuretic. Select one such drug from the list:
a. Prazosin
*b. Triamterene
c. Diltiazem
d. Furosemide
e. Bisoprolol
51. A 35-year-old patient has been prescribed a potassium-sparing diuretic. Select one such drug from the list:
a. Prazosin
b. Furosemide
*c. Triamterene
d. Diltiazem
e. Bisoprolol
52. A 35-year-old patient with tachycardia has been administered propranolol. Which of the following reactions may be caused by the use of beta-blockers?
a. Constipations
b. Drug dependence
*c. Bronchospasm
d. Cumulation
e. Blood pressure rise
53. A 35-year-old patient with tachycardia has been administered propranolol. Which of the following reactions may be caused by the use of beta-blockers?
a. Cumulation
b. Constipations
*c. Bronchospasm
d. Drug dependence
e. Blood pressure rise
54. A 35-year-old patient with tachycardia has been administered propranolol. Which of the following reactions may be caused by the use of beta-blockers?
a. Drug dependence
b. Blood pressure rise
c. Constipations
d. Cumulation
*e. Bronchospasm
55. A 36-year-old patient developed acute pyelonephritis. What antibacterial agents has a nephrotoxic effect?
a. Ampicillin
b. Erythromycin
*c. Gentamicin
d. Tetracycline
e. Penicillin
56. A 36-year-old patient developed acute pyelonephritis. What antibacterial agents has a nephrotoxic effect?
a. Erythromycin
*b. Gentamicin
c. Ampicillin
d. Tetracycline
e. Penicillin
57. A 36-year-old patient developed acute pyelonephritis. What antibacterial agents has a nephrotoxic effect?
a. Erythromycin
b. Penicillin
c. Ampicillin
*d. Gentamicin
e. Tetracycline
58. A 36-year-old woman with herpetic rash on her lips has come to a pharmacy. Recommend her a drug for topical treatment:
a. Amikacin
b. Levofloxacin
c. Fluconazole
d. Metronidazole
*e. Acyclovir
59. A 36-year-old woman with herpetic rash on her lips has come to a pharmacy. Recommend her a drug for topical treatment:
a. Fluconazole
b. Levofloxacin
c. Amikacin
*d. Acyclovir
e. Metronidazole
60. A 36-year-old woman with herpetic rash on her lips has come to a pharmacy. Recommend her a drug for topical treatment:
a. Metronidazole
b. Levofloxacin
*c. Acyclovir
d. Amikacin
e. Fluconazole
61. A 42-year-old man with community-acquired pneumonia was prescribed a long-term antibiotic treatment. What drugs should be prescribed to this patient to prevent development of dysbiosis?
*a. Probiotics
b. Expectorants
c. Antispasmodics
d. Antitussive drugs
e. Mucolytic agents
62. A 42-year-old man with community-acquired pneumonia was prescribed a long-term antibiotic treatment. What drugs should be prescribed to this patient to prevent development of dysbiosis?
a. Expectorants
b. Antispasmodics
*c. Probiotics
d. Mucolytic agents
e. Antitussive drugs
63. A 42-year-old man with community-acquired pneumonia was prescribed a long-term antibiotic treatment. What drugs should be prescribed to this patient to prevent development of dysbiosis?
a. Mucolytic agents
b. Antitussive drugs
*c. Probiotics
d. Expectorants
e. Antispasmodics
64. A 43-year-old patient was delivered to an admission room with renal colic attack. What group of drugs would be the most effective during the attack?
*a. Antispasmodics
b. Antacids
c. Cholagogues
d. Hepatoprotectors
e. Antibiotics
65. A 43-year-old patient was delivered to an admission room with renal colic attack. What group of drugs would be the most effective during the attack?
a. Antacids
b. Antibiotics
c. Cholagogues
d. Hepatoprotectors
*e. Antispasmodics
66. A 43-year-old patient was delivered to an admission room with renal colic attack. What group of drugs would be the most effective during the attack?
a. Cholagogues
b. Antibiotics
c. Antacids
d. Hepatoprotectors
*e. Antispasmodics
67. A 43-year-old patient with a severe form of rheumatoid arthritis has been administered a certain drug for background therapy. Specify this drug:
a. Diclofenac sodium
*b. Methotrexate
c. Methylprednisolone
d. Prednisolone
e. Nimesulide
68. A 43-year-old patient with a severe form of rheumatoid arthritis has been administered a certain drug for background therapy. Specify this drug:
a. Diclofenac sodium
b. Nimesulide
*c. Methotrexate
d. Prednisolone
e. Methylprednisolone
69. A 43-year-old patient with a severe form of rheumatoid arthritis has been administered a certain drug for background therapy. Specify this drug:
a. Nimesulide
b. Diclofenac sodium
c. Methylprednisolone
d. Prednisolone
*e. Methotrexate
70. A 43-year-old woman has come to a pharmacy with complaints of sharp headache in the occipital area, palpitations, ''visual snow'' in her eyes, nausea; her BP is 180/110 mm Hg. These symptoms correspond with:
*a. Hypertensic crisis
b. Migraine attack
c. Exertional angina pectoris attack
d. Acute conjunctivitis
e. Cervical osteochondrosis
71. A 43-year-old woman has come to a pharmacy with complaints of sharp headache in the occipital area, palpitations, ''visual snow'' in her eyes, nausea; her BP is 180/110 mm Hg. These symptoms correspond with:
a. Migraine attack
b. Cervical osteochondrosis
*c. Hypertensic crisis
d. Exertional angina pectoris attack
e. Acute conjunctivitis
72. A 43-year-old woman has come to a pharmacy with complaints of sharp headache in the occipital area, palpitations, ''visual snow'' in her eyes, nausea; her BP is 180/110 mm Hg. These symptoms correspond with:
a. Migraine attack
b. Exertional angina pectoris attack
c. Cervical osteochondrosis
*d. Hypertensic crisis
e. Acute conjunctivitis
73. A 44-year-old man was diagnosed with chronic hyperacid gastritis. What pharmacological group of drugs would be the most advisable in this case?
a. Glucocorticosteroids
*b. Proton pump inhibitors
c. Alpha-blockers
d. Inhibitors of protein-degrading enzymes
e. Beta-blockers
74. A 44-year-old man was diagnosed with chronic hyperacid gastritis. What pharmacological group of drugs would be the most advisable in this case?
a. Glucocorticosteroids
b. Inhibitors of protein-degrading enzymes
c. Alpha-blockers
*d. Proton pump inhibitors
e. Beta-blockers
75. A 44-year-old man was diagnosed with chronic hyperacid gastritis. What pharmacological group of drugs would be the most advisable in this case?
a. Inhibitors of protein-degrading enzymes
b. Beta-blockers
c. Glucocorticosteroids
*d. Proton pump inhibitors
e. Alpha-blockers
76. A 45-year-old man complains of wet cough. He has been suffering from chronic bronchitis for 20 years. The patient is a smoker. He needs a mucolytic agent that will facilitate expectoration and production of surfactant. What drug can be recommended to the patient in this case?
*a. Ambroxol
b. Proteolytic enzymes
c. Licorice root
d. Thermopsis preparations
e. Potassium iodide
77. A 45-year-old man complains of wet cough. He has been suffering from chronic bronchitis for 20 years. The patient is a smoker. He needs a mucolytic agent that will facilitate expectoration and production of surfactant. What drug can be recommended to the patient in this case?
a. Licorice root
b. Thermopsis preparations
c. Potassium iodide
*d. Ambroxol
e. Proteolytic enzymes
78. A 45-year-old man complains of wet cough. He has been suffering from chronic bronchitis for 20 years. The patient is a smoker. He needs a mucolytic agent that will facilitate expectoration and production of surfactant. What drug can be recommended to the patient in this case?
a. Proteolytic enzymes
b. Potassium iodide
c. Thermopsis preparations
*d. Ambroxol
e. Licorice root
79. A 45-year-old man has been taking long-acting nitrates twice a day for a year. Currently the decrease in effectiveness of the pharmacotherapy is being observed. What side-effect can be suspected in the first place?
*a. Development of nitrate tolerance
b. Progressing coronary atherosclerosis
c. Progressing ischemic heart disease
d. Impairment of coronary circulation
e. Myocardial infarction
80. A 45-year-old man has been taking long-acting nitrates twice a day for a year. Currently the decrease in effectiveness of the pharmacotherapy is being observed. What side-effect can be suspected in the first place?
a. Impairment of coronary circulation
b. Myocardial infarction
c. Progressing coronary atherosclerosis
d. Progressing ischemic heart disease
*e. Development of nitrate tolerance
81. A 45-year-old man has been taking long-acting nitrates twice a day for a year. Currently the decrease in effectiveness of the pharmacotherapy is being observed. What side-effect can be suspected in the first place?
a. Myocardial infarction
b. Progressing coronary atherosclerosis
c. Impairment of coronary circulation
d. Progressing ischemic heart disease
*e. Development of nitrate tolerance
82. A 46-year-old man came to a dispensing chemist complaining of a dry cough. What antitussive drug can he be recommended?
a. Bromhexine
*b. Oxeladin
c. Tripsin
d. Acetylcysteine
e. Sodium bicarbonate
83. A 46-year-old man came to a dispensing chemist complaining of a dry cough. What antitussive drug can he be recommended?
a. Bromhexine
b. Acetylcysteine
*c. Oxeladin
d. Sodium bicarbonate
e. Tripsin
84. A 46-year-old man came to a dispensing chemist complaining of a dry cough. What antitussive drug can he be recommended?
a. Tripsin
*b. Oxeladin
c. Bromhexine
d. Sodium bicarbonate
e. Acetylcysteine
85. A 46-year-old pharmacy customer suffers from chronic bronchitis and needs a medicine to facilitate expectoration of thick viscous sputum. What drug is indicated in this case?
*a. Ambroxol
b. Oxeladin
c. Butamirate
d. Salbutamol
e. Codeine phosphate
86. A 46-year-old pharmacy customer suffers from chronic bronchitis and needs a medicine to facilitate expectoration of thick viscous sputum. What drug is indicated in this case?
*a. Ambroxol
b. Salbutamol
c. Butamirate
d. Oxeladin
e. Codeine phosphate
87. A 46-year-old pharmacy customer suffers from chronic bronchitis and needs a medicine to facilitate expectoration of thick viscous sputum. What drug is indicated in this case?
a. Butamirate
b. Salbutamol
c. Codeine phosphate
d. Oxeladin
*e. Ambroxol
88. A 48-year-old woman, who undergoes a prolonged treatment for chronic hepatitis, was diagnosed with pneumonia. What antibacterial agent should she be prescribed in this case?
a. Rifampicin
b. Biseptol (Co-trimoxazole)
c. Streptomycin
*d. Amoxicillin
e. Tetracycline
89. A 48-year-old woman, who undergoes a prolonged treatment for chronic hepatitis, was diagnosed with pneumonia. What antibacterial agent should she be prescribed in this case?
a. Rifampicin
b. Streptomycin
c. Tetracycline
*d. Amoxicillin
e. Biseptol (Co-trimoxazole)
90. A 48-year-old woman, who undergoes a prolonged treatment for chronic hepatitis, was diagnosed with pneumonia. What antibacterial agent should she be prescribed in this case?
a. Tetracycline
b. Rifampicin
c. Biseptol (Co-trimoxazole)
*d. Amoxicillin
e. Streptomycin
91. A 50-year-old woman complains of headache, dizziness, visual snow, and nausea. The skin of her face is hyperemic. Objectively, her heart rate is 85/min., her blood pressure is 210/120 mm Hg. What is the provisional diagnosis in this case?
*a. Hypertensive crisis
b. Angina pectoris attack
c. Meningococcal infection
d. Hemorrhagic stroke
e. Myocardial infarction
92. A 50-year-old woman complains of headache, dizziness, visual snow, and nausea. The skin of her face is hyperemic. Objectively, her heart rate is 85/min., her blood pressure is 210/120 mm Hg. What is the provisional diagnosis in this case?
a. Hemorrhagic stroke
b. Myocardial infarction
*c. Hypertensive crisis
d. Meningococcal infection
e. Angina pectoris attack
93. A 50-year-old woman complains of headache, dizziness, visual snow, and nausea. The skin of her face is hyperemic. Objectively, her heart rate is 85/min., her blood pressure is 210/120 mm Hg. What is the provisional diagnosis in this case?
a. Meningococcal infection
b. Hemorrhagic stroke
c. Angina pectoris attack
*d. Hypertensive crisis
e. Myocardial infarction
94. A 52-year-old patient, who takes heparin, developed signs of the drug overdose. What antidote should be used in this case?
*a. Protamine sulfate
b. Acetylcysteine
c. Potassium chloride
d. Naloxone
e. Unithiol
95. A 52-year-old patient, who takes heparin, developed signs of the drug overdose. What antidote should be used in this case?
a. Naloxone
b. Unithiol
*c. Protamine sulfate
d. Acetylcysteine
e. Potassium chloride
96. A 52-year-old patient, who takes heparin, developed signs of the drug overdose. What antidote should be used in this case?
a. Unithiol
b. Potassium chloride
c. Naloxone
d. Acetylcysteine
*e. Protamine sulfate
97. A 53-year-old patient diagnosed with arterial hypertension is undergoing inpatient treatment. After the examinations, the urologist diagnosed the patient with a prostate adenoma. What can be the drug of choice in this case?
a. Enalapril
b. Bisoprolol
*c. Doxazosin
d. Verapamil
e. Propranolol
98. A 53-year-old patient diagnosed with arterial hypertension is undergoing inpatient treatment. After the examinations, the urologist diagnosed the patient with a prostate adenoma. What can be the drug of choice in this case?
a. Propranolol
b. Verapamil
*c. Doxazosin
d. Enalapril
e. Bisoprolol
99. A 53-year-old patient diagnosed with arterial hypertension is undergoing inpatient treatment. After the examinations, the urologist diagnosed the patient with a prostate adenoma. What can be the drug of choice in this case?
a. Verapamil
b. Enalapril
c. Propranolol
d. Bisoprolol
*e. Doxazosin
100. A 53-year-old woman suffers from ischemic heart disease and angina pectoris. What drug can be used to stop angina pectoris attacks?
*a. Nitroglycerine
b. Drotaverine hydrochloride
c. Dipiridamol
d. Propranolol
e. Acetylsalicylic acid
101. A 53-year-old woman suffers from ischemic heart disease and angina pectoris. What drug can be used to stop angina pectoris attacks?
a. Dipiridamol
*b. Nitroglycerine
c. Acetylsalicylic acid
d. Drotaverine hydrochloride
e. Propranolol
102. A 53-year-old woman suffers from ischemic heart disease and angina pectoris. What drug can be used to stop angina pectoris attacks?
a. Propranolol
b. Dipiridamol
*c. Nitroglycerine
d. Acetylsalicylic acid
e. Drotaverine hydrochloride
103. A 54-year-old hypertonic patient undergoing pharmacotherapy developed bronchial spasm. His physician considers it to be a therapy-induced complication caused by the drug that belongs to the following group:
a. Calcium antagonists
b. Ganglionic blockers
*c. beta-adrenergic blockers
d. alpha-adrenergic blockers
e. Diuretics
104. A 54-year-old hypertonic patient undergoing pharmacotherapy developed bronchial spasm. His physician considers it to be a therapy-induced complication caused by the drug that belongs to the following group:
a. alpha-adrenergic blockers
b. Calcium antagonists
c. Ganglionic blockers
d. Diuretics
*e. beta-adrenergic blockers
105. A 54-year-old hypertonic patient undergoing pharmacotherapy developed bronchial spasm. His physician considers it to be a therapy-induced complication caused by the drug that belongs to the following group:
a. alpha-adrenergic blockers
b. Ganglionic blockers
c. Calcium antagonists
*d. beta-adrenergic blockers
e. Diuretics
106. A 58-year-old patient with persistent bronchial asthma receives long-term inhalation therapy. Within a week, symptoms of candidiasis appeared in her oral cavity. What medicines could have caused this side effect?
a. Herbal antiseptics
b. Mucolytics
c. Inhaled muscarinic antagonists
*d. Inhaled glucocorticosteroids
e. Inhaled beta_2-adrenergic agonists
107. A 58-year-old patient with persistent bronchial asthma receives long-term inhalation therapy. Within a week, symptoms of candidiasis appeared in her oral cavity. What medicines could have caused this side effect?
a. Herbal antiseptics
b. Mucolytics
c. Inhaled muscarinic antagonists
d. Inhaled beta_2-adrenergic agonists
*e. Inhaled glucocorticosteroids
108. A 58-year-old patient with persistent bronchial asthma receives long-term inhalation therapy. Within a week, symptoms of candidiasis appeared in her oral cavity. What medicines could have caused this side effect?
a. Inhaled beta_2-adrenergic agonists
b. Inhaled muscarinic antagonists
*c. Inhaled glucocorticosteroids
d. Mucolytics
e. Herbal antiseptics
109. A 6-year-old child developed pneumonia and was prescribed an antibiotic for its treatment. After the treatment the child's hearing deteriorated. What drug could have caused this complication?
a. Azithromycin
*b. Gentamicin
c. Penicillin
d. Ampicillin
e. Ceftriaxone
110. A 6-year-old child developed pneumonia and was prescribed an antibiotic for its treatment. After the treatment the child's hearing deteriorated. What drug could have caused this complication?
a. Azithromycin
b. Ceftriaxone
c. Penicillin
*d. Gentamicin
e. Ampicillin
111. A 6-year-old child developed pneumonia and was prescribed an antibiotic for its treatment. After the treatment the child's hearing deteriorated. What drug could have caused this complication?
a. Ceftriaxone
b. Penicillin
c. Azithromycin
d. Ampicillin
*e. Gentamicin
112. A 6-year-old girl has been suffering from bronchial asthma for 3 years. To stop the attacks, the pediatrician prescribed her a short-acting beta_2-adrenomimetic. What medicine was prescribed by the doctor in this case?
*a. Salbutamol
b. Budesonide
c. Ipratropium bromide
d. Fluticasone
e. Tiotropium bromide
113. A 6-year-old girl has been suffering from bronchial asthma for 3 years. To stop the attacks, the pediatrician prescribed her a short-acting beta_2-adrenomimetic. What medicine was prescribed by the doctor in this case?
*a. Salbutamol
b. Budesonide
c. Tiotropium bromide
d. Ipratropium bromide
e. Fluticasone
114. A 6-year-old girl has been suffering from bronchial asthma for 3 years. To stop the attacks, the pediatrician prescribed her a short-acting beta_2-adrenomimetic. What medicine was prescribed by the doctor in this case?
a. Tiotropium bromide
b. Ipratropium bromide
*c. Salbutamol
d. Budesonide
e. Fluticasone
115. A 60-year-old man has come to a pharmacy with complaints of impaired twilight vision, dry sclera, cracked and peeling skin. The dispensing chemist suspected hypovitaminosis and recommended the customer to take the following drug after consultation with the physician:
*a. Retinol acetate
b. Vicasol (Menadione)
c. Ascorbic acid
d. Tocopherol acetate
e. Ergocalciferol
116. A 60-year-old man has come to a pharmacy with complaints of impaired twilight vision, dry sclera, cracked and peeling skin. The dispensing chemist suspected hypovitaminosis and recommended the customer to take the following drug after consultation with the physician:
a. Ergocalciferol
b. Vicasol (Menadione)
c. Tocopherol acetate
*d. Retinol acetate
e. Ascorbic acid
117. A 60-year-old man has come to a pharmacy with complaints of impaired twilight vision, dry sclera, cracked and peeling skin. The dispensing chemist suspected hypovitaminosis and recommended the customer to take the following drug after consultation with the physician:
a. Vicasol (Menadione)
b. Ascorbic acid
c. Ergocalciferol
d. Tocopherol acetate
*e. Retinol acetate
118. A 60-year-old patient diagnosed with ischemic heart disease developed bradycardia of 50 min. What drug will be contraindicated in this case?
*a. Propranolol
b. Heparin
c. Nitroglycerin
d. Nitrosorbide (Isosorbide dinitrate)
e. Nifedipine
119. A 60-year-old patient diagnosed with ischemic heart disease developed bradycardia of 50 min. What drug will be contraindicated in this case?
a. Heparin
*b. Propranolol
c. Nitrosorbide (Isosorbide dinitrate)
d. Nifedipine
e. Nitroglycerin
120. A 60-year-old patient diagnosed with ischemic heart disease developed bradycardia of 50 min. What drug will be contraindicated in this case?
a. Nifedipine
b. Nitroglycerin
c. Nitrosorbide (Isosorbide dinitrate)
d. Heparin
*e. Propranolol
121. A 60-year-old patient, who had suffered a myocardial infarction, was prescribed acetylsalicylic acid as an antiaggregant. Specify the optimal daily dosage of acetylsalicylic acid for antiaggregatory effect:
a. 300 mg
b. 500 mg
*c. 100 mg
d. 200 mg
e. 400 mg
122. A 60-year-old patient, who had suffered a myocardial infarction, was prescribed acetylsalicylic acid as an antiaggregant. Specify the optimal daily dosage of acetylsalicylic acid for antiaggregatory effect:
a. 400 mg
b. 500 mg
*c. 100 mg
d. 200 mg
e. 300 mg
123. A 60-year-old patient, who had suffered a myocardial infarction, was prescribed acetylsalicylic acid as an antiaggregant. Specify the optimal daily dosage of acetylsalicylic acid for antiaggregatory effect:
a. 500 mg
b. 300 mg
*c. 100 mg
d. 200 mg
e. 400 mg
124. A 62-year-old woman has been diagnosed with acute pyelonephritis. She was prescribed gentamicin. Additionally, she takes furosemide. What are the possible complications of such treatment?
a. High risk of seizures
*b. Increased ototoxicity of  aminoglycosides
c. Increased hepatotoxic action of  aminoglycosides
d. Increased hematotoxicity of  gentamicin
e. High risk of allergic reactions
125. A 62-year-old woman has been diagnosed with acute pyelonephritis. She was prescribed gentamicin. Additionally, she takes furosemide. What are the possible complications of such treatment?
a. Increased hematotoxicity of  gentamicin
b. High risk of seizures
*c. Increased ototoxicity of  aminoglycosides
d. High risk of allergic reactions
e. Increased hepatotoxic action of  aminoglycosides
126. A 62-year-old woman has been diagnosed with acute pyelonephritis. She was prescribed gentamicin. Additionally, she takes furosemide. What are the possible complications of such treatment?
a. Increased hematotoxicity of  gentamicin
b. Increased hepatotoxic action of  aminoglycosides
*c. Increased ototoxicity of  aminoglycosides
d. High risk of seizures
e. High risk of allergic reactions
127. A 63-year-old man suffering from ischemic heart disease was diagnosed with angle closure glaucoma. What group of drugs is textbfCONTRAINDICATED in this case?
*a. Nitrates
b. beta-adrenergic blockers
c. Calcium antagonists
d. Statins
e. Anticoagulants
128. A 63-year-old man suffering from ischemic heart disease was diagnosed with angle closure glaucoma. What group of drugs is textbfCONTRAINDICATED in this case?
a. Anticoagulants
*b. Nitrates
c. beta-adrenergic blockers
d. Calcium antagonists
e. Statins
129. A 63-year-old man suffering from ischemic heart disease was diagnosed with angle closure glaucoma. What group of drugs is textbfCONTRAINDICATED in this case?
a. beta-adrenergic blockers
*b. Nitrates
c. Statins
d. Anticoagulants
e. Calcium antagonists
130. A 63-year-old woman suffering from diabetic nephropathy with functional disturbance of the kidneys needs etiotropic treatment for focal pneumonia. What drug is textbfCONTRAINDICATED in this case?
a. Combined penicillins
*b. Aminoglycosides
c. Macrolides
d. Synthetic penicillins
e. Natural penicillins
131. A 63-year-old woman suffering from diabetic nephropathy with functional disturbance of the kidneys needs etiotropic treatment for focal pneumonia. What drug is textbfCONTRAINDICATED in this case?
a. Natural penicillins
b. Macrolides
c. Synthetic penicillins
*d. Aminoglycosides
e. Combined penicillins
132. A 63-year-old woman suffering from diabetic nephropathy with functional disturbance of the kidneys needs etiotropic treatment for focal pneumonia. What drug is textbfCONTRAINDICATED in this case?
a. Synthetic penicillins
b. Natural penicillins
c. Macrolides
d. Combined penicillins
*e. Aminoglycosides
133. A 65-year-old man has been taking nitroglycerin continuously for 2 months. Lately, he has been observing a gradual decrease in its clinical effect. Name the concept that describes this phenomenon:
*a. Tolerance
b. Anaphylactic reaction
c. Reye syndrome
d. Withdrawal syndrome
e. Idiosyncrasy
134. A 65-year-old man has been taking nitroglycerin continuously for 2 months. Lately, he has been observing a gradual decrease in its clinical effect. Name the concept that describes this phenomenon:
a. Idiosyncrasy
b. Reye syndrome
*c. Tolerance
d. Withdrawal syndrome
e. Anaphylactic reaction
135. A 65-year-old man has been taking nitroglycerin continuously for 2 months. Lately, he has been observing a gradual decrease in its clinical effect. Name the concept that describes this phenomenon:
a. Reye syndrome
*b. Tolerance
c. Anaphylactic reaction
d. Withdrawal syndrome
e. Idiosyncrasy
136. A 65-year-old man with community-acquired pneumonia was prescribed antibiotic agent amikacin. It should be kept in mind, that amikacin has the following side-effect:
*a. Ototoxicity
b. Decreased blood pressure
c. Increased blood pressure
d. Red coloring of urine
e. Vomiting
137. A 65-year-old man with community-acquired pneumonia was prescribed antibiotic agent amikacin. It should be kept in mind, that amikacin has the following side-effect:
a. Increased blood pressure
b. Decreased blood pressure
c. Red coloring of urine
*d. Ototoxicity
e. Vomiting
138. A 65-year-old man with community-acquired pneumonia was prescribed antibiotic agent amikacin. It should be kept in mind, that amikacin has the following side-effect:
a. Vomiting
b. Decreased blood pressure
c. Increased blood pressure
d. Red coloring of urine
*e. Ototoxicity
139. A 65-year-old patient diagnosed with ischemic heart disease was prescribed acetylsalicylic acid as an antiplatelet agent. What daily dose of this drug will have an antiplatelet effect?
*a. 100 mg
b. 200 mg
c. 400 mg
d. 500 mg
e. 300 mg
140. A 65-year-old patient diagnosed with ischemic heart disease was prescribed acetylsalicylic acid as an antiplatelet agent. What daily dose of this drug will have an antiplatelet effect?
*a. 100 mg
b. 300 mg
c. 400 mg
d. 200 mg
e. 500 mg
141. A 65-year-old patient diagnosed with ischemic heart disease was prescribed acetylsalicylic acid as an antiplatelet agent. What daily dose of this drug will have an antiplatelet effect?
*a. 100 mg
b. 500 mg
c. 300 mg
d. 400 mg
e. 200 mg
142. A 67-year-old man with chronic heart failure takes digoxin. To reduce the side effects of digoxin, his doctor recommended him to combine this drug with:
*a. Potassium aspartate and magnesium aspartate
b. Hydrochlorothiazide
c. Calcium gluconate
d. Euphyllin (Aminophylline)
e. Calcium chloride
143. A 67-year-old man with chronic heart failure takes digoxin. To reduce the side effects of digoxin, his doctor recommended him to combine this drug with:
a. Hydrochlorothiazide
b. Calcium chloride
*c. Potassium aspartate and magnesium aspartate
d. Calcium gluconate
e. Euphyllin (Aminophylline)
144. A 67-year-old man with chronic heart failure takes digoxin. To reduce the side effects of digoxin, his doctor recommended him to combine this drug with:
a. Hydrochlorothiazide
b. Calcium chloride
*c. Potassium aspartate and magnesium aspartate
d. Euphyllin (Aminophylline)
e. Calcium gluconate
145. A 68-year-old man has been prescribed a hypolipidemic agent as a part of his combination therapy for ischemic heart disease. Name this drug:
*a. Atorvastatin
b. Hydrochlorothiazide
c. Lisinopril
d. Nitroglycerine
e. Nifedipine
146. A 68-year-old man has been prescribed a hypolipidemic agent as a part of his combination therapy for ischemic heart disease. Name this drug:
a. Nifedipine
b. Lisinopril
c. Hydrochlorothiazide
*d. Atorvastatin
e. Nitroglycerine
147. A 68-year-old man has been prescribed a hypolipidemic agent as a part of his combination therapy for ischemic heart disease. Name this drug:
a. Nitroglycerine
b. Lisinopril
*c. Atorvastatin
d. Hydrochlorothiazide
e. Nifedipine
148. A 70-year-old patient with stenocardia claims that the pharmacy had sold him a drug that relieved an attack of stenocardia but instead caused an acute bursting headache. What antihypertensive drug is this side-effect typical of?
*a. Nitrosorbid
b. Amlodipine
c. Trimetazidine
d. Metoprolol
e. Nifedipine
149. A 70-year-old patient with stenocardia claims that the pharmacy had sold him a drug that relieved an attack of stenocardia but instead caused an acute bursting headache. What antihypertensive drug is this side-effect typical of?
a. Nifedipine
b. Trimetazidine
c. Metoprolol
d. Amlodipine
*e. Nitrosorbid
150. A 70-year-old patient with stenocardia claims that the pharmacy had sold him a drug that relieved an attack of stenocardia but instead caused an acute bursting headache. What antihypertensive drug is this side-effect typical of?
a. Trimetazidine
b. Nifedipine
c. Metoprolol
d. Amlodipine
*e. Nitrosorbid
151. A 74-year-old man came to the pharmacy. He had been prescribed ampicillin for antibiotic treatment of dysenteric gastroenterocolitis. What group of drugs should be recommended for dysbiosis prevention in this case?
*a. Probiotics
b. Antacids
c. Enzymatic agents
d. Immunosuppressants
e. Sorbents
152. A 74-year-old man came to the pharmacy. He had been prescribed ampicillin for antibiotic treatment of dysenteric gastroenterocolitis. What group of drugs should be recommended for dysbiosis prevention in this case?
a. Immunosuppressants
*b. Probiotics
c. Enzymatic agents
d. Sorbents
e. Antacids
153. A 74-year-old man came to the pharmacy. He had been prescribed ampicillin for antibiotic treatment of dysenteric gastroenterocolitis. What group of drugs should be recommended for dysbiosis prevention in this case?
a. Immunosuppressants
b. Sorbents
c. Antacids
*d. Probiotics
e. Enzymatic agents
154. A certain drug can be quantitatively assessed by means of direct alkalimetry in glycerine, mannitol, or other polyhydric alcohol medium. This drug is:
*a. Boric acid
b. Acetylsalicylic acid
c. Glutaminic acid
d. Salicylic acid
e. Benzoic acid
155. A certain drug can be quantitatively assessed by means of direct alkalimetry in glycerine, mannitol, or other polyhydric alcohol medium. This drug is:
*a. Boric acid
b. Salicylic acid
c. Glutaminic acid
d. Benzoic acid
e. Acetylsalicylic acid
156. A certain drug can be quantitatively assessed by means of direct alkalimetry in glycerine, mannitol, or other polyhydric alcohol medium. This drug is:
a. Benzoic acid
b. Salicylic acid
c. Glutaminic acid
*d. Boric acid
e. Acetylsalicylic acid
157. A certain drug explodes when heated to 180^oC or upon impact and, therefore, must be handled carefully during receipt and storage. This drug is:
*a. Nitroglycerine solution
b. Activated carbon
c. Alcoholic iodine solution
d. Barium chloride
e. Calcium chloride
158. A certain drug explodes when heated to 180^oC or upon impact and, therefore, must be handled carefully during receipt and storage. This drug is:
a. Barium chloride
b. Activated carbon
*c. Nitroglycerine solution
d. Calcium chloride
e. Alcoholic iodine solution
159. A certain drug explodes when heated to 180^oC or upon impact and, therefore, must be handled carefully during receipt and storage. This drug is:
a. Calcium chloride
b. Activated carbon
c. Barium chloride
d. Alcoholic iodine solution
*e. Nitroglycerine solution
160. A certain herbal raw material is used to make Flamin cholagogue. Name this material:
*a. Helichrysi arenarii flores
b. Meliloti herba
c. Tanaceti flores
d. Violae herba
e. Cratаegi flores
161. A certain herbal raw material is used to make Flamin cholagogue. Name this material:
a. Tanaceti flores
b. Cratаegi flores
c. Violae herba
*d. Helichrysi arenarii flores
e. Meliloti herba
162. A certain herbal raw material is used to make Flamin cholagogue. Name this material:
a. Tanaceti flores
b. Meliloti herba
c. Cratаegi flores
d. Violae herba
*e. Helichrysi arenarii flores
163. A certain injection solution cannot undergo thermal sterilization, because high temperatures lead to its hydrolysis with formation of formaldehyde and ammonia. Name this solution:
*a. Hexamethylenetetramine solution
b. Glucose solution
c. Aminazine solution
d. Novocaine (procaine) solution
e. Diprazine (promethazine) solution
164. A certain injection solution cannot undergo thermal sterilization, because high temperatures lead to its hydrolysis with formation of formaldehyde and ammonia. Name this solution:
a. Glucose solution
b. Novocaine (procaine) solution
c. Diprazine (promethazine) solution
*d. Hexamethylenetetramine solution
e. Aminazine solution
165. A certain injection solution cannot undergo thermal sterilization, because high temperatures lead to its hydrolysis with formation of formaldehyde and ammonia. Name this solution:
a. Novocaine (procaine) solution
b. Diprazine (promethazine) solution
c. Aminazine solution
d. Glucose solution
*e. Hexamethylenetetramine solution
166. A certain management style can be characterized by the following features: the authority is highly centralized; work duties of the employees are very structured; the ability of employees to make decisions is extremely limited; strict compliance with numerous rules and regulations is prioritized. Name this management style:
*a. Authoritarian
b. Direct
c. Liberal
d. Democratic
e. Collective
167. A certain management style can be characterized by the following features: the authority is highly centralized; work duties of the employees are very structured; the ability of employees to make decisions is extremely limited; strict compliance with numerous rules and regulations is prioritized. Name this management style:
*a. Authoritarian
b. Liberal
c. Direct
d. Collective
e. Democratic
168. A certain management style can be characterized by the following features: the authority is highly centralized; work duties of the employees are very structured; the ability of employees to make decisions is extremely limited; strict compliance with numerous rules and regulations is prioritized. Name this management style:
a. Direct
b. Liberal
*c. Authoritarian
d. Collective
e. Democratic
169. A certain medicinal plant belongs to the Papaveraceae family. It produces a characteristic yellow milky sap and has choleretic, antiseptic, and diuretic properties. The main active substance contained in this plant is alkaloid chelidonine. Name this plant:
*a. Chelidonium majus
b. Hyoscyamus niger
c. Berberis vulgaris
d. Papaver somniferum
e. Atropa belladonna
170. A certain medicinal plant belongs to the Papaveraceae family. It produces a characteristic yellow milky sap and has choleretic, antiseptic, and diuretic properties. The main active substance contained in this plant is alkaloid chelidonine. Name this plant:
a. Berberis vulgaris
*b. Chelidonium majus
c. Atropa belladonna
d. Papaver somniferum
e. Hyoscyamus niger
171. A certain medicinal plant belongs to the Papaveraceae family. It produces a characteristic yellow milky sap and has choleretic, antiseptic, and diuretic properties. The main active substance contained in this plant is alkaloid chelidonine. Name this plant:
a. Hyoscyamus niger
b. Atropa belladonna
c. Berberis vulgaris
*d. Chelidonium majus
e. Papaver somniferum
172. A certain pharmaceutical company is focused on the manufacture of medicines, while the sales play only a secondary role. What is the company's main type of business activity in this case?
*a. Manufacture
b. Finances
c. Leasing
d. Consulting services
e. Insurance
173. A certain pharmaceutical company is focused on the manufacture of medicines, while the sales play only a secondary role. What is the company's main type of business activity in this case?
a. Consulting services
*b. Manufacture
c. Leasing
d. Finances
e. Insurance
174. A certain pharmaceutical company is focused on the manufacture of medicines, while the sales play only a secondary role. What is the company's main type of business activity in this case?
a. Insurance
b. Finances
c. Leasing
d. Consulting services
*e. Manufacture
175. A certain primary document can be described as follows: ''It is a document printed by a cash register, when it makes calculations regarding the goods sold''. Specify this document:
*a. Fiscal receipt for the goods sold (or services rendered)
b. Accounting form
c. Cash withdrawal receipt
d. Cash cheque
e. Payment order
176. A certain primary document can be described as follows: ''It is a document printed by a cash register, when it makes calculations regarding the goods sold''. Specify this document:
a. Payment order
*b. Fiscal receipt for the goods sold (or services rendered)
c. Cash withdrawal receipt
d. Cash cheque
e. Accounting form
177. A certain primary document can be described as follows: ''It is a document printed by a cash register, when it makes calculations regarding the goods sold''. Specify this document:
a. Payment order
b. Cash withdrawal receipt
*c. Fiscal receipt for the goods sold (or services rendered)
d. Cash cheque
e. Accounting form
178. A certain substance is yellow, but does not leave a colored mark on the filter paper, mortar, and pestle. Powders with this substance are prepared according to the general rules. Name this substance:
a. Furacilin (Nitrofural)
b. Riboflavin
*c. Sulfur
d. Methylene blue
e. Brilliant green
179. A certain substance is yellow, but does not leave a colored mark on the filter paper, mortar, and pestle. Powders with this substance are prepared according to the general rules. Name this substance:
a. Methylene blue
b. Furacilin (Nitrofural)
c. Riboflavin
*d. Sulfur
e. Brilliant green
180. A certain substance is yellow, but does not leave a colored mark on the filter paper, mortar, and pestle. Powders with this substance are prepared according to the general rules. Name this substance:
a. Riboflavin
*b. Sulfur
c. Methylene blue
d. Brilliant green
e. Furacilin (Nitrofural)
181. A certain type of herbal raw material is being collected in spring during sap flow. Specify this material:
a. Buds
*b. Bark
c. Flowers
d. Roots
e. Infructescences
182. A certain type of herbal raw material is being collected in spring during sap flow. Specify this material:
a. Flowers
b. Buds
*c. Bark
d. Roots
e. Infructescences
183. A certain type of herbal raw material is being collected in spring during sap flow. Specify this material:
a. Roots
*b. Bark
c. Infructescences
d. Buds
e. Flowers
184. A company manager analyzes, how effectively the available material assets are used, and identifies and eliminates the deviations arising in the course of work. What type of control is it?
a. Final
b. Financial
*c. Current
d. Preliminary
e. -
185. A company manager analyzes, how effectively the available material assets are used, and identifies and eliminates the deviations arising in the course of work. What type of control is it?
a. Financial
b. -
*c. Current
d. Preliminary
e. Final
186. A company manager analyzes, how effectively the available material assets are used, and identifies and eliminates the deviations arising in the course of work. What type of control is it?
a. Financial
b. Final
c. -
*d. Current
e. Preliminary
187. A compound powder is being made of ingredients taken in relatively equal measure. What ingredients should be comminuted first?
*a. Macrocrystalline
b. Coloring
c. Volatile
d. Colored
e. Microcrystalline
188. A compound powder is being made of ingredients taken in relatively equal measure. What ingredients should be comminuted first?
a. Colored
*b. Macrocrystalline
c. Volatile
d. Coloring
e. Microcrystalline
189. A compound powder is being made of ingredients taken in relatively equal measure. What ingredients should be comminuted first?
a. Microcrystalline
b. Coloring
*c. Macrocrystalline
d. Volatile
e. Colored
190. A control laboratory needs to analyze streptomycin powder for injections. To identify it according to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine sodium hydroxide is added into the dissolved powder, the resulting substance is heated, and then iron (III) chloride solution is added, which results in violet coloring of the substance. This test is known as:
*a. Maltol test
b. Thiochrome test
c. Ninhydrin test
d. Biuret test
e. Vitali-Morin reaction
191. A control laboratory needs to analyze streptomycin powder for injections. To identify it according to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine sodium hydroxide is added into the dissolved powder, the resulting substance is heated, and then iron (III) chloride solution is added, which results in violet coloring of the substance. This test is known as:
a. Vitali-Morin reaction
*b. Maltol test
c. Biuret test
d. Thiochrome test
e. Ninhydrin test
192. A control laboratory needs to analyze streptomycin powder for injections. To identify it according to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine sodium hydroxide is added into the dissolved powder, the resulting substance is heated, and then iron (III) chloride solution is added, which results in violet coloring of the substance. This test is known as:
a. Vitali-Morin reaction
b. Thiochrome test
*c. Maltol test
d. Ninhydrin test
e. Biuret test
193. A decoction of Bidens grass has an anti-allergic effect and is often used in pediatrics. What species of this plant is pharmacopoeial?
a. Bidens aurea
b. Bidens frondosa
*c. Bidens tripartita
d. Bidens radiata
e. Bidens cernua
194. A decoction of Bidens grass has an anti-allergic effect and is often used in pediatrics. What species of this plant is pharmacopoeial?
a. Bidens aurea
b. Bidens frondosa
c. Bidens radiata
d. Bidens cernua
*e. Bidens tripartita
195. A decoction of Bidens grass has an anti-allergic effect and is often used in pediatrics. What species of this plant is pharmacopoeial?
a. Bidens frondosa
*b. Bidens tripartita
c. Bidens aurea
d. Bidens cernua
e. Bidens radiata
196. A dispensing chemist has a total insured work record of 10 years. It means that the dispensing chemist can expect the following amount of temporary disability benefits:
a. 50% of the average salary
b. 70% of the average salary
*c. 100% of the average salary
d. 60% of the average salary
e. 80% of the average salary
197. A dispensing chemist has a total insured work record of 10 years. It means that the dispensing chemist can expect the following amount of temporary disability benefits:
a. 60% of the average salary
*b. 100% of the average salary
c. 70% of the average salary
d. 50% of the average salary
e. 80% of the average salary
198. A dispensing chemist has a total insured work record of 10 years. It means that the dispensing chemist can expect the following amount of temporary disability benefits:
a. 80% of the average salary
b. 60% of the average salary
*c. 100% of the average salary
d. 70% of the average salary
e. 50% of the average salary
199. A dispensing chemist has dispensed to a pharmacy visitor one package of metformin tablets according to the family doctor's electronic prescription. This purchase is to be reimbursed. How long must a pharmacy keep such prescriptions?
*a. Three years after the current one
b. Five years after the current one
c. Return the prescription to the pharmacy visitor
d. One month after the current one
e. Two months after the current one
200. A dispensing chemist has dispensed to a pharmacy visitor one package of metformin tablets according to the family doctor's electronic prescription. This purchase is to be reimbursed. How long must a pharmacy keep such prescriptions?
*a. Three years after the current one
b. Return the prescription to the pharmacy visitor
c. Two months after the current one
d. One month after the current one
e. Five years after the current one
201. A dispensing chemist has dispensed to a pharmacy visitor one package of metformin tablets according to the family doctor's electronic prescription. This purchase is to be reimbursed. How long must a pharmacy keep such prescriptions?
a. One month after the current one
b. Two months after the current one
*c. Three years after the current one
d. Return the prescription to the pharmacy visitor
e. Five years after the current one
202. A dispensing chemist has received his salary with a bonus for working at night. This bonus is paid for the following working hours:
a. From 20.00 to 9.00
b. From 24.00 to 8.00
*c. From 22.00 to 6.00
d. From 23.00 to 7.00
e. From 21.00 to 9.00
203. A dispensing chemist has received his salary with a bonus for working at night. This bonus is paid for the following working hours:
a. From 23.00 to 7.00
b. From 20.00 to 9.00
c. From 24.00 to 8.00
d. From 21.00 to 9.00
*e. From 22.00 to 6.00
204. A dispensing chemist has received his salary with a bonus for working at night. This bonus is paid for the following working hours:
a. From 23.00 to 7.00
b. From 24.00 to 8.00
c. From 21.00 to 9.00
d. From 20.00 to 9.00
*e. From 22.00 to 6.00
205. A dispensing chemist identifies metronidazole substance after reduction of the nitro group into an aromatic amino group. The dispensing chemist uses a reaction that produces the following:
a. Aurine dye
b. Azomethine dye
*c. Azo dye
d. Iron(III) hydroxamate
e. Indophenol dye
206. A dispensing chemist identifies metronidazole substance after reduction of the nitro group into an aromatic amino group. The dispensing chemist uses a reaction that produces the following:
a. Indophenol dye
b. Aurine dye
*c. Azo dye
d. Iron(III) hydroxamate
e. Azomethine dye
207. A dispensing chemist identifies metronidazole substance after reduction of the nitro group into an aromatic amino group. The dispensing chemist uses a reaction that produces the following:
a. Indophenol dye
b. Azomethine dye
c. Iron(III) hydroxamate
*d. Azo dye
e. Aurine dye
208. A dispensing chemist makes a research into the pharmaceutical market. For this purpose he uses scientific publications and statistical data. What type of marketing research is it?
*a. Theoretical research
b. Field research
c. Survey
d. Panel research
e. Observation
209. A dispensing chemist makes a research into the pharmaceutical market. For this purpose he uses scientific publications and statistical data. What type of marketing research is it?
a. Observation
*b. Theoretical research
c. Panel research
d. Survey
e. Field research
210. A dispensing chemist makes a research into the pharmaceutical market. For this purpose he uses scientific publications and statistical data. What type of marketing research is it?
a. Panel research
b. Field research
*c. Theoretical research
d. Survey
e. Observation
211. A dispensing chemist performs quantitative determination of nifedipine substance, using the method of cerimetry. What indicator should be used in this method, according to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine?
a. Bromphenol blue
b. Methyl orange
*c. Ferroin
d. Potassium chromate
e. Phenolphthalein
212. A dispensing chemist performs quantitative determination of nifedipine substance, using the method of cerimetry. What indicator should be used in this method, according to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine?
a. Bromphenol blue
b. Methyl orange
c. Phenolphthalein
d. Potassium chromate
*e. Ferroin
213. A dispensing chemist performs quantitative determination of nifedipine substance, using the method of cerimetry. What indicator should be used in this method, according to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine?
a. Phenolphthalein
b. Potassium chromate
c. Methyl orange
d. Bromphenol blue
*e. Ferroin
214. A dispensing chemist specifies the name of a herbal raw material, its mass, the area where it has been harvested, and the date of harvest. Name this procedure:
a. Harvestig of herbal raw material
*b. Marking of herbal raw material
c. Sorting of herbal raw material
d. Standardization of herbal raw material
e. Packing of herbal raw material
215. A dispensing chemist specifies the name of a herbal raw material, its mass, the area where it has been harvested, and the date of harvest. Name this procedure:
a. Standardization of herbal raw material
b. Packing of herbal raw material
c. Sorting of herbal raw material
d. Harvestig of herbal raw material
*e. Marking of herbal raw material
216. A dispensing chemist specifies the name of a herbal raw material, its mass, the area where it has been harvested, and the date of harvest. Name this procedure:
a. Standardization of herbal raw material
b. Sorting of herbal raw material
c. Packing of herbal raw material
d. Harvestig of herbal raw material
*e. Marking of herbal raw material
217. A dispensing chemist uses iodometry (back titration) for quantitative determination of caffeine medicinal substance. What indicator is used in this case?
*a. Starch
b. Phenolphthalein
c. Eriochrome black
d. Phenol red
e. Litmus paper
218. A dispensing chemist uses iodometry (back titration) for quantitative determination of caffeine medicinal substance. What indicator is used in this case?
a. Litmus paper
b. Eriochrome black
*c. Starch
d. Phenol red
e. Phenolphthalein
219. A dispensing chemist uses iodometry (back titration) for quantitative determination of caffeine medicinal substance. What indicator is used in this case?
a. Litmus paper
b. Eriochrome black
c. Phenolphthalein
d. Phenol red
*e. Starch
220. A dispensing chemist was hired to work a night shift at a pharmacy. What time is considered to be a night time according to the Ukrainian legislation currently in force?
*a. From 22:00 to 6:00
b. From 22:00 to 10:00
c. From 22:00 to 7:00
d. From 21:00 to 6:00
e. From 00:00 to 8:00
221. A dispensing chemist was hired to work a night shift at a pharmacy. What time is considered to be a night time according to the Ukrainian legislation currently in force?
a. From 21:00 to 6:00
*b. From 22:00 to 6:00
c. From 22:00 to 7:00
d. From 00:00 to 8:00
e. From 22:00 to 10:00
222. A dispensing chemist was hired to work a night shift at a pharmacy. What time is considered to be a night time according to the Ukrainian legislation currently in force?
a. From 22:00 to 10:00
b. From 21:00 to 6:00
c. From 00:00 to 8:00
d. From 22:00 to 7:00
*e. From 22:00 to 6:00
223. A dispensing chemist with calculated length of service of 7 years has fallen ill. What percent of the sum stated in her sick list would she receive?
*a. 80%
b. 100%
c. 60%
d. 70%
e. 50%
224. A dispensing chemist with calculated length of service of 7 years has fallen ill. What percent of the sum stated in her sick list would she receive?
*a. 80%
b. 50%
c. 60%
d. 70%
e. 100%
225. A dispensing chemist with calculated length of service of 7 years has fallen ill. What percent of the sum stated in her sick list would she receive?
a. 100%
b. 50%
*c. 80%
d. 60%
e. 70%
226. A dispensing chemist-analyst identifies phenol, using a phenolic hydroxyl reaction. What reagent is necessary for this reaction?
a. Calcium chloride
b. Sodium sulfate
c. Sulfuric acid
d. Potassium chloride
*e. Iron(III) chloride
227. A dispensing chemist-analyst identifies phenol, using a phenolic hydroxyl reaction. What reagent is necessary for this reaction?
a. Calcium chloride
b. Sulfuric acid
c. Sodium sulfate
*d. Iron(III) chloride
e. Potassium chloride
228. A dispensing chemist-analyst identifies phenol, using a phenolic hydroxyl reaction. What reagent is necessary for this reaction?
a. Sodium sulfate
b. Potassium chloride
*c. Iron(III) chloride
d. Calcium chloride
e. Sulfuric acid
229. A dispensing chemist-technologist has accepted a prescription for eye drops with adrenaline hydrochloride. What characteristic of adrenaline hydrochloride must be taken into account, when preparing the eye drops?
*a. Thermolability
b. Volatility
c. Low solubility in water
d. Poor solubility in water
e. Thermal stability
230. A dispensing chemist-technologist has accepted a prescription for eye drops with adrenaline hydrochloride. What characteristic of adrenaline hydrochloride must be taken into account, when preparing the eye drops?
a. Low solubility in water
b. Poor solubility in water
c. Thermal stability
d. Volatility
*e. Thermolability
231. A dispensing chemist-technologist has accepted a prescription for eye drops with adrenaline hydrochloride. What characteristic of adrenaline hydrochloride must be taken into account, when preparing the eye drops?
a. Thermal stability
b. Low solubility in water
*c. Thermolability
d. Poor solubility in water
e. Volatility
232. A doctor has asked a dispensing chemist for consultation on free dispensation of medicines. What free drugs can the doctor prescribe to an epileptic patient for outpatient treatment?
a. Only imported drugs
b. Any drugs registered for distribution in Ukraine
c. Only vital drugs
*d. Only the drugs from the list of approved procurements for budget-financed healthcare facilities
e. Only drugs produced domestically
233. A doctor has asked a dispensing chemist for consultation on free dispensation of medicines. What free drugs can the doctor prescribe to an epileptic patient for outpatient treatment?
a. Only vital drugs
b. Any drugs registered for distribution in Ukraine
c. Only drugs produced domestically
d. Only imported drugs
*e. Only the drugs from the list of approved procurements for budget-financed healthcare facilities
234. A doctor has asked a dispensing chemist for consultation on free dispensation of medicines. What free drugs can the doctor prescribe to an epileptic patient for outpatient treatment?
a. Only vital drugs
b. Only imported drugs
c. Only drugs produced domestically
*d. Only the drugs from the list of approved procurements for budget-financed healthcare facilities
e. Any drugs registered for distribution in Ukraine
235. A doctor has given the patient a prescription for tramadol. What prescription form must be used in this case?
a. 2 copies of F-3 form
*b. F-3 form
c. 2 copies of F-1 form
d. F-1 form
e. F-1 and F-3 forms
236. A doctor has given the patient a prescription for tramadol. What prescription form must be used in this case?
a. 2 copies of F-3 form
b. 2 copies of F-1 form
*c. F-3 form
d. F-1 and F-3 forms
e. F-1 form
237. A doctor has given the patient a prescription for tramadol. What prescription form must be used in this case?
a. F-1 form
b. F-1 and F-3 forms
c. 2 copies of F-1 form
d. 2 copies of F-3 form
*e. F-3 form
238. A doctor has prescribed a mixture containing several types of herbal raw material. Extracts of the following raw materials can be obtained in one infusion apparatus:
a. Mint leaves, Althaea roots
b. Mint leaves, flax seeds
c. Mint leaves, buckthorn bark
*d. Mint leaves, chamomile flowers
e. Mint leaves, Arctostaphylos leaves
239. A doctor has prescribed a mixture containing several types of herbal raw material. Extracts of the following raw materials can be obtained in one infusion apparatus:
a. Mint leaves, Arctostaphylos leaves
b. Mint leaves, buckthorn bark
c. Mint leaves, Althaea roots
d. Mint leaves, flax seeds
*e. Mint leaves, chamomile flowers
240. A doctor has prescribed a mixture containing several types of herbal raw material. Extracts of the following raw materials can be obtained in one infusion apparatus:
a. Mint leaves, buckthorn bark
b. Mint leaves, Althaea roots
*c. Mint leaves, chamomile flowers
d. Mint leaves, Arctostaphylos leaves
e. Mint leaves, flax seeds
241. A doctor has prescribed pessaries of unspecified mass. What mass should be chosen when pessaries are being prepared in a pharmacy?
a. 0,5
b. 1,5
c. 3,0
d. 6,0
*e. 4,0
242. A doctor has prescribed pessaries of unspecified mass. What mass should be chosen when pessaries are being prepared in a pharmacy?
a. 3,0
b. 1,5
c. 6,0
d. 0,5
*e. 4,0
243. A doctor has prescribed pessaries of unspecified mass. What mass should be chosen when pessaries are being prepared in a pharmacy?
a. 6,0
*b. 4,0
c. 1,5
d. 3,0
e. 0,5
244. A doctor has written the following prescription for the preparation of a dosage form: Unguenti Benzylpenicillini-natrii 10.0 Misce. Da. Signa: Apply under the eyelid 3 times a dayendtabular. What base should be used to make this ointment?
a. 10.0 of vaseline (petroleum jelly) "for eye ointments"
b. A mixture of vaseline (petroleum jelly) "for eye ointments" and anhydrous lanolin (5:5)
*c. A mixture of vaseline (petroleum jelly) "for eye ointments" and anhydrous lanolin (6:4)
d. A mixture of vaseline (petroleum jelly) "for eye ointments" and anhydrous lanolin (7:3)
e. A mixture of paraffin and sunflower oil (3:7)
245. A doctor has written the following prescription for the preparation of a dosage form: Unguenti Benzylpenicillini-natrii 10.0 Misce. Da. Signa: Apply under the eyelid 3 times a dayendtabular. What base should be used to make this ointment?
a. A mixture of paraffin and sunflower oil (3:7)
b. A mixture of vaseline (petroleum jelly) "for eye ointments" and anhydrous lanolin (7:3)
c. 10.0 of vaseline (petroleum jelly) "for eye ointments"
*d. A mixture of vaseline (petroleum jelly) "for eye ointments" and anhydrous lanolin (6:4)
e. A mixture of vaseline (petroleum jelly) "for eye ointments" and anhydrous lanolin (5:5)
246. A doctor has written the following prescription for the preparation of a dosage form: Unguenti Benzylpenicillini-natrii 10.0 Misce. Da. Signa: Apply under the eyelid 3 times a dayendtabular. What base should be used to make this ointment?
a. A mixture of vaseline (petroleum jelly) "for eye ointments" and anhydrous lanolin (5:5)
b. A mixture of vaseline (petroleum jelly) "for eye ointments" and anhydrous lanolin (7:3)
c. A mixture of paraffin and sunflower oil (3:7)
*d. A mixture of vaseline (petroleum jelly) "for eye ointments" and anhydrous lanolin (6:4)
e. 10.0 of vaseline (petroleum jelly) "for eye ointments"
247. A doctor prescribed amoxicillin to a patient to treat bronchitis. What mucolytic is synergistic with this antibiotic?
*a. Ambroxol
b. Glaucine
c. Dextromethorphan
d. Euphylline (Theophylline)
e. Codeine
248. A doctor prescribed amoxicillin to a patient to treat bronchitis. What mucolytic is synergistic with this antibiotic?
a. Codeine
*b. Ambroxol
c. Euphylline (Theophylline)
d. Glaucine
e. Dextromethorphan
249. A doctor prescribed amoxicillin to a patient to treat bronchitis. What mucolytic is synergistic with this antibiotic?
a. Dextromethorphan
*b. Ambroxol
c. Glaucine
d. Codeine
e. Euphylline (Theophylline)
250. A doctor prescribed the drug simvastatin to the patient to correct hyperlipidemia. Why should the selected daily dose be taken once in the evening?
a. Absorption of the drug increases at night
*b. Cholesterol biosynthesis occurs mainly at night
c. Receptor sensitivity to low-density lipoproteins increases
d. Risk of myopathy decreases
e. Catabolism rate of low-density lipoproteins increases
251. A doctor prescribed the drug simvastatin to the patient to correct hyperlipidemia. Why should the selected daily dose be taken once in the evening?
a. Catabolism rate of low-density lipoproteins increases
b. Absorption of the drug increases at night
c. Risk of myopathy decreases
d. Receptor sensitivity to low-density lipoproteins increases
*e. Cholesterol biosynthesis occurs mainly at night
252. A doctor prescribed the drug simvastatin to the patient to correct hyperlipidemia. Why should the selected daily dose be taken once in the evening?
a. Receptor sensitivity to low-density lipoproteins increases
b. Risk of myopathy decreases
c. Catabolism rate of low-density lipoproteins increases
*d. Cholesterol biosynthesis occurs mainly at night
e. Absorption of the drug increases at night
253. A domestic pharmaceutical company introduces to the market a generic drug at a significantly lower price than its imported brand name counterparts. What pricing strategy has this domestic company chosen?
a. ''Skim-the-cream'' strategy
b. Tender pricing strategy
c. Following the leader
*d. Deep penetration into the market
e. -
254. A domestic pharmaceutical company introduces to the market a generic drug at a significantly lower price than its imported brand name counterparts. What pricing strategy has this domestic company chosen?
a. Following the leader
b. Tender pricing strategy
c. ''Skim-the-cream'' strategy
d. -
*e. Deep penetration into the market
255. A domestic pharmaceutical company introduces to the market a generic drug at a significantly lower price than its imported brand name counterparts. What pricing strategy has this domestic company chosen?
a. Tender pricing strategy
b. ''Skim-the-cream'' strategy
*c. Deep penetration into the market
d. Following the leader
e. -
256. A drug quality control laboratory performs certification of antibiotics. What antibiotic has alpha-amino acid residue that can be determined using the ninhydrin reaction?
a. Cefazolin
*b. Ampicillin
c. Lincomycin
d. Oxacillin
e. Chloramphenicol
257. A drug quality control laboratory performs certification of antibiotics. What antibiotic has alpha-amino acid residue that can be determined using the ninhydrin reaction?
a. Lincomycin
*b. Ampicillin
c. Chloramphenicol
d. Oxacillin
e. Cefazolin
258. A drug quality control laboratory performs certification of antibiotics. What antibiotic has alpha-amino acid residue that can be determined using the ninhydrin reaction?
a. Lincomycin
b. Oxacillin
c. Chloramphenicol
*d. Ampicillin
e. Cefazolin
259. A drug that is subject to reimbursement has been dispensed at a pharmacy based on an electronic prescription. How long such a prescription must be stored in the information and telecommunications system?
a. 2 years
b. 5 years
c. 6 months
d. 3 months
*e. 3 years
260. A drug that is subject to reimbursement has been dispensed at a pharmacy based on an electronic prescription. How long such a prescription must be stored in the information and telecommunications system?
a. 2 years
b. 6 months
c. 3 months
d. 5 years
*e. 3 years
261. A drug that is subject to reimbursement has been dispensed at a pharmacy based on an electronic prescription. How long such a prescription must be stored in the information and telecommunications system?
a. 3 months
b. 5 years
c. 6 months
*d. 3 years
e. 2 years
262. A factory that manufactures vitamin preparations has received a batch of herbal raw material. It consists of round wrinkled orange-red fruits that taste sweet-sour and slightly tarty. The fruits are up to 3 cm long, 1.5 cm in diameter, and are filled with hard small angular yellow nutlets. The nutlets and the inner surface of the fruits are covered with long and extremely coarse bristly down. This herbal raw material can be identified as:
*a. Fructus Rosae
b. Fructus Ribis nigri
c. Fructus Viburni
d. Fructus Hippophaes
e. Fructus Sorbi
263. A factory that manufactures vitamin preparations has received a batch of herbal raw material. It consists of round wrinkled orange-red fruits that taste sweet-sour and slightly tarty. The fruits are up to 3 cm long, 1.5 cm in diameter, and are filled with hard small angular yellow nutlets. The nutlets and the inner surface of the fruits are covered with long and extremely coarse bristly down. This herbal raw material can be identified as:
a. Fructus Sorbi
*b. Fructus Rosae
c. Fructus Ribis nigri
d. Fructus Hippophaes
e. Fructus Viburni
264. A factory that manufactures vitamin preparations has received a batch of herbal raw material. It consists of round wrinkled orange-red fruits that taste sweet-sour and slightly tarty. The fruits are up to 3 cm long, 1.5 cm in diameter, and are filled with hard small angular yellow nutlets. The nutlets and the inner surface of the fruits are covered with long and extremely coarse bristly down. This herbal raw material can be identified as:
a. Fructus Sorbi
b. Fructus Viburni
c. Fructus Hippophaes
*d. Fructus Rosae
e. Fructus Ribis nigri
265. A factrory workshop producing suspensions and emulsions is going to develop the manufacture of new drugs. What mechanisms can be used for the ultrasound processing of drugs?
a. Dismembrator, electrical impulse plasmolyzer
b. Disintegrator, liquid whistle
c. Centrifugal mixer with rotating housing
*d. Liquid whistle, magnetostrictive source
e. Rotor-pulsation apparatus, dismembrator
266. A factrory workshop producing suspensions and emulsions is going to develop the manufacture of new drugs. What mechanisms can be used for the ultrasound processing of drugs?
a. Rotor-pulsation apparatus, dismembrator
*b. Liquid whistle, magnetostrictive source
c. Dismembrator, electrical impulse plasmolyzer
d. Centrifugal mixer with rotating housing
e. Disintegrator, liquid whistle
267. A factrory workshop producing suspensions and emulsions is going to develop the manufacture of new drugs. What mechanisms can be used for the ultrasound processing of drugs?
a. Rotor-pulsation apparatus, dismembrator
b. Disintegrator, liquid whistle
c. Centrifugal mixer with rotating housing
*d. Liquid whistle, magnetostrictive source
e. Dismembrator, electrical impulse plasmolyzer
268. A folic acid molecule has a heterocyclic system, consisting of two condensed heterocycles - pyrimidine and pyrazine. Name this system:
a. Isoalloxazine
*b. Pteridine
c. Corrin
d. Phenothiazine
e. Purine
269. A folic acid molecule has a heterocyclic system, consisting of two condensed heterocycles - pyrimidine and pyrazine. Name this system:
a. Isoalloxazine
b. Corrin
*c. Pteridine
d. Phenothiazine
e. Purine
270. A folic acid molecule has a heterocyclic system, consisting of two condensed heterocycles - pyrimidine and pyrazine. Name this system:
a. Purine
b. Isoalloxazine
*c. Pteridine
d. Phenothiazine
e. Corrin
271. A formaldehyde solution was received for analysis. What reagent should be used to identify this substance?
a. Acetic acid
b. Sulfuric acid
c. Tartaric acid
d. Benzoic acid
*e. Chromotropic acid
272. A formaldehyde solution was received for analysis. What reagent should be used to identify this substance?
a. Sulfuric acid
b. Benzoic acid
*c. Chromotropic acid
d. Tartaric acid
e. Acetic acid
273. A formaldehyde solution was received for analysis. What reagent should be used to identify this substance?
a. Tartaric acid
b. Benzoic acid
c. Sulfuric acid
d. Acetic acid
*e. Chromotropic acid
274. A group of independent intermediaries operates on a regional market. They sell medicines on their own behalf and at their own cost. Such intermediaries are called:
a. Brokers
*b. Dealers
c. Agents
d. Consignees
e. Commission agents
275. A group of independent intermediaries operates on a regional market. They sell medicines on their own behalf and at their own cost. Such intermediaries are called:
a. Commission agents
*b. Dealers
c. Brokers
d. Agents
e. Consignees
276. A group of independent intermediaries operates on a regional market. They sell medicines on their own behalf and at their own cost. Such intermediaries are called:
a. Commission agents
b. Agents
c. Consignees
d. Brokers
*e. Dealers
277. A herbal mix contains Cortex Frangulae, Folia Urticae, and Herba Millefolii. Name the characteristic microscopic features that allow identification of Folia Urticae herbal raw material:
a. Bast fibers, tracheids, starch, vessels
*b. Capitate, flask-shaped, and stinging hairs; cystoliths; vessels of the conducting bundle, veins, druses of calcium oxalate
c. T-shaped hairs along the leaf margin
d. Many-armed, two-armed, and simple hairs
e. Simple capitate hairs
278. A herbal mix contains Cortex Frangulae, Folia Urticae, and Herba Millefolii. Name the characteristic microscopic features that allow identification of Folia Urticae herbal raw material:
a. Bast fibers, tracheids, starch, vessels
b. Simple capitate hairs
c. Many-armed, two-armed, and simple hairs
*d. Capitate, flask-shaped, and stinging hairs; cystoliths; vessels of the conducting bundle, veins, druses of calcium oxalate
e. T-shaped hairs along the leaf margin
279. A herbal mix contains Cortex Frangulae, Folia Urticae, and Herba Millefolii. Name the characteristic microscopic features that allow identification of Folia Urticae herbal raw material:
a. T-shaped hairs along the leaf margin
b. Simple capitate hairs
c. Bast fibers, tracheids, starch, vessels
*d. Capitate, flask-shaped, and stinging hairs; cystoliths; vessels of the conducting bundle, veins, druses of calcium oxalate
e. Many-armed, two-armed, and simple hairs
280. A herbal raw material (fruits) was sent for analysis. This material consists of glossy black drupes 8 mm in diameter with one large spherical light-brown seed that is very firm. Its chemical anlysis showed the presence of condensed tannins. What plant is the source of this herbal raw material?
a. Rhamnus cathartica
b. Ribes nigrum
c. Schisandra chinensis
*d. Prunus padus
e. Vaccinium myrtillus
281. A herbal raw material (fruits) was sent for analysis. This material consists of glossy black drupes 8 mm in diameter with one large spherical light-brown seed that is very firm. Its chemical anlysis showed the presence of condensed tannins. What plant is the source of this herbal raw material?
a. Schisandra chinensis
b. Rhamnus cathartica
c. Vaccinium myrtillus
d. Ribes nigrum
*e. Prunus padus
282. A herbal raw material (fruits) was sent for analysis. This material consists of glossy black drupes 8 mm in diameter with one large spherical light-brown seed that is very firm. Its chemical anlysis showed the presence of condensed tannins. What plant is the source of this herbal raw material?
a. Vaccinium myrtillus
b. Rhamnus cathartica
c. Schisandra chinensis
*d. Prunus padus
e. Ribes nigrum
283. A herbal raw material that contains alkaloids is being identified using a freshly prepared tannin solution. What precipitate forms as a result of this reaction?
a. Green
b. Creamy
c. Yellow
d. Red-brown
*e. White and amorphous
284. A herbal raw material that contains alkaloids is being identified using a freshly prepared tannin solution. What precipitate forms as a result of this reaction?
a. Yellow
*b. White and amorphous
c. Green
d. Red-brown
e. Creamy
285. A herbal raw material that contains alkaloids is being identified using a freshly prepared tannin solution. What precipitate forms as a result of this reaction?
a. Yellow
b. Green
*c. White and amorphous
d. Red-brown
e. Creamy
286. A herbal raw material that contains coumarin and chromone derivatives is a source of drugs with thrombolytic, photosensitizing, and antispasmodic action. Which compound in this group has a proven photosensitizing effect?
a. Free coumarin
b. Furanochromon kelin
*c. Furocoumarin psoralen
d. Pyranocoumarin visnadin
e. Hydroxycoumarin esculin
287. A herbal raw material that contains coumarin and chromone derivatives is a source of drugs with thrombolytic, photosensitizing, and antispasmodic action. Which compound in this group has a proven photosensitizing effect?
a. Free coumarin
b. Pyranocoumarin visnadin
*c. Furocoumarin psoralen
d. Hydroxycoumarin esculin
e. Furanochromon kelin
288. A herbal raw material that contains coumarin and chromone derivatives is a source of drugs with thrombolytic, photosensitizing, and antispasmodic action. Which compound in this group has a proven photosensitizing effect?
a. Hydroxycoumarin esculin
b. Free coumarin
*c. Furocoumarin psoralen
d. Pyranocoumarin visnadin
e. Furanochromon kelin
289. A herbal raw material was sent for analysis. The material consists of cylindrical pieces of roots of varying length, covered with a brown, longitudinally wrinkled bark. When peeled, the raw material externally varies in color from light yellow to brownish yellow and is light yellow and very fibrous on section. Its smell is faint. Its taste is sweet and slightly irritating. What herbal raw material is being analyzed in this case?
*a. Glycyrrhiza roots
b. Berberis roots
c. Taraxacum roots
d. Aralia mandshurica roots
e. Panax ginseng roots
290. A herbal raw material was sent for analysis. The material consists of cylindrical pieces of roots of varying length, covered with a brown, longitudinally wrinkled bark. When peeled, the raw material externally varies in color from light yellow to brownish yellow and is light yellow and very fibrous on section. Its smell is faint. Its taste is sweet and slightly irritating. What herbal raw material is being analyzed in this case?
*a. Glycyrrhiza roots
b. Panax ginseng roots
c. Berberis roots
d. Taraxacum roots
e. Aralia mandshurica roots
291. A herbal raw material was sent for analysis. The material consists of cylindrical pieces of roots of varying length, covered with a brown, longitudinally wrinkled bark. When peeled, the raw material externally varies in color from light yellow to brownish yellow and is light yellow and very fibrous on section. Its smell is faint. Its taste is sweet and slightly irritating. What herbal raw material is being analyzed in this case?
a. Berberis roots
b. Taraxacum roots
c. Panax ginseng roots
*d. Glycyrrhiza roots
e. Aralia mandshurica roots
292. A herbal raw material was sent for analysis: rounded cordate leaves with incised margins that are irregularly, coarsely, and finely toothed; the upper leaf surface is naked, while its lower surface is covered in white down. Leaf petioles are thin, with a groove on the upper part, often downy. Leaf blade length is usually 8-15 cm, a petiole is approximately 5 cm long. The upper leaf surface is green, while the lower leaf surface is whitish-gray. No odor. The taste is slighly bitter with a slimy texture. What herbal raw material is it?
a. Folia Eucalypti
*b. Folia Farfarae
c. Folia Uvae-ursi
d. Folia Urticae
e. Folia Menthae
293. A herbal raw material was sent for analysis: rounded cordate leaves with incised margins that are irregularly, coarsely, and finely toothed; the upper leaf surface is naked, while its lower surface is covered in white down. Leaf petioles are thin, with a groove on the upper part, often downy. Leaf blade length is usually 8-15 cm, a petiole is approximately 5 cm long. The upper leaf surface is green, while the lower leaf surface is whitish-gray. No odor. The taste is slighly bitter with a slimy texture. What herbal raw material is it?
a. Folia Menthae
b. Folia Uvae-ursi
c. Folia Urticae
d. Folia Eucalypti
*e. Folia Farfarae
294. A herbal raw material was sent for analysis: rounded cordate leaves with incised margins that are irregularly, coarsely, and finely toothed; the upper leaf surface is naked, while its lower surface is covered in white down. Leaf petioles are thin, with a groove on the upper part, often downy. Leaf blade length is usually 8-15 cm, a petiole is approximately 5 cm long. The upper leaf surface is green, while the lower leaf surface is whitish-gray. No odor. The taste is slighly bitter with a slimy texture. What herbal raw material is it?
a. Folia Urticae
b. Folia Menthae
*c. Folia Farfarae
d. Folia Eucalypti
e. Folia Uvae-ursi
295. A lactone test was conducted to verify the authenticity of Melilotus grass. What group of compounds can be detected using this test?
a. Lignans
b. Anthracene derivatives
*c. Coumarins
d. Cardiac glycosides
e. Saponins
296. A lactone test was conducted to verify the authenticity of Melilotus grass. What group of compounds can be detected using this test?
a. Saponins
b. Anthracene derivatives
*c. Coumarins
d. Lignans
e. Cardiac glycosides
297. A lactone test was conducted to verify the authenticity of Melilotus grass. What group of compounds can be detected using this test?
a. Saponins
b. Anthracene derivatives
c. Cardiac glycosides
*d. Coumarins
e. Lignans
298. A large pharmaceutical company produces a homogeneous selection of medicinal products and sells them on the domestic market. What model of marketing service organization was chosen by this company?
*a. Functional
b. Segment-oriented
c. Market-oriented
d. Product-oriented
e. Regional
299. A large pharmaceutical company produces a homogeneous selection of medicinal products and sells them on the domestic market. What model of marketing service organization was chosen by this company?
a. Market-oriented
b. Regional
c. Segment-oriented
d. Product-oriented
*e. Functional
300. A large pharmaceutical company produces a homogeneous selection of medicinal products and sells them on the domestic market. What model of marketing service organization was chosen by this company?
a. Regional
*b. Functional
c. Product-oriented
d. Market-oriented
e. Segment-oriented
301. A man came to a pharmacist and asked to recommend him a herbal tonic and adaptogen. What herbal raw material has such a pharmacological effect?
a. Flax seeds
b. Pumpkin seeds
c. Silybum fruits
*d. Schisandra seeds
e. Fennel fruits
302. A man came to a pharmacist and asked to recommend him a herbal tonic and adaptogen. What herbal raw material has such a pharmacological effect?
a. Pumpkin seeds
b. Fennel fruits
*c. Schisandra seeds
d. Flax seeds
e. Silybum fruits
303. A man came to a pharmacist and asked to recommend him a herbal tonic and adaptogen. What herbal raw material has such a pharmacological effect?
a. Silybum fruits
b. Fennel fruits
*c. Schisandra seeds
d. Flax seeds
e. Pumpkin seeds
304. A man came to a pharmacy asking for a litholytic and diuretic drug <<Marelin>>. If there is no such drug in the pharmacy, powdered roots and rhizomes of a certain plant can be recommended as a substitute. Name this plant:
a. Dryopteris filix-mas
*b. Rubia tinctorum
c. Rhodiola rosea
d. Sanguisorba officinalis
e. Valeriana officinalis
305. A man came to a pharmacy asking for a litholytic and diuretic drug <<Marelin>>. If there is no such drug in the pharmacy, powdered roots and rhizomes of a certain plant can be recommended as a substitute. Name this plant:
a. Dryopteris filix-mas
b. Sanguisorba officinalis
*c. Rubia tinctorum
d. Valeriana officinalis
e. Rhodiola rosea
306. A man came to a pharmacy asking for a litholytic and diuretic drug <<Marelin>>. If there is no such drug in the pharmacy, powdered roots and rhizomes of a certain plant can be recommended as a substitute. Name this plant:
a. Sanguisorba officinalis
b. Dryopteris filix-mas
*c. Rubia tinctorum
d. Valeriana officinalis
e. Rhodiola rosea
307. A man came to the ophthalmologist complaining of poor twilight vision. Having collected the patient's medical history, the doctor suspected that these signs could be caused by the lack of a certain vitamin. What vitamin is likely to be deficient in this case?
a. Ergocalciferol
b. Cholecalciferol
c. Phylloquinone (Phytomenadione)
d. Tocopherol
*e. Retinol
308. A man came to the ophthalmologist complaining of poor twilight vision. Having collected the patient's medical history, the doctor suspected that these signs could be caused by the lack of a certain vitamin. What vitamin is likely to be deficient in this case?
a. Ergocalciferol
b. Phylloquinone (Phytomenadione)
*c. Retinol
d. Tocopherol
e. Cholecalciferol
309. A man came to the ophthalmologist complaining of poor twilight vision. Having collected the patient's medical history, the doctor suspected that these signs could be caused by the lack of a certain vitamin. What vitamin is likely to be deficient in this case?
a. Tocopherol
b. Ergocalciferol
c. Cholecalciferol
d. Phylloquinone (Phytomenadione)
*e. Retinol
310. A man has bought nitroglycerine for sublingual administration in a pharmacy. He wants to know, what side effect might develop after taking this medicine:
a. Dry cough
b. Increased blood pressure
c. Urinary retention
*d. Headache
e. Drowsiness
311. A man has bought nitroglycerine for sublingual administration in a pharmacy. He wants to know, what side effect might develop after taking this medicine:
a. Increased blood pressure
b. Drowsiness
c. Urinary retention
*d. Headache
e. Dry cough
312. A man has bought nitroglycerine for sublingual administration in a pharmacy. He wants to know, what side effect might develop after taking this medicine:
a. Increased blood pressure
b. Dry cough
c. Urinary retention
d. Drowsiness
*e. Headache
313. A man with arterial hypertension has blood pressure of 160/100 mm Hg and heart rate of 64/min. and presents with signs of fluid retention (pastose shins, dyspnea, etc.). What hypotensive agent is the drug of choice in case of edema syndrome?
a. Enalapril
b. Amlodipine
c. Losartan
*d. Hydrochlorothiazide
e. Metoprolol
314. A man with arterial hypertension has blood pressure of 160/100 mm Hg and heart rate of 64/min. and presents with signs of fluid retention (pastose shins, dyspnea, etc.). What hypotensive agent is the drug of choice in case of edema syndrome?
a. Losartan
b. Amlodipine
c. Enalapril
d. Metoprolol
*e. Hydrochlorothiazide
315. A man with arterial hypertension has blood pressure of 160/100 mm Hg and heart rate of 64/min. and presents with signs of fluid retention (pastose shins, dyspnea, etc.). What hypotensive agent is the drug of choice in case of edema syndrome?
a. Metoprolol
b. Amlodipine
c. Losartan
d. Enalapril
*e. Hydrochlorothiazide
316. A man with arterial hypertension was recommended the following to increase the antihypertensive effect of a diuretic:
a. Increase the amount of liquids in the  diet
*b. Decrease the amount of table salt in  the diet
c. Increase the amount of table salt in  the diet
d. Increase the physical exertion
e. Decrease the physical exertion
317. A man with arterial hypertension was recommended the following to increase the antihypertensive effect of a diuretic:
a. Increase the amount of table salt in  the diet
b. Increase the physical exertion
c. Increase the amount of liquids in the  diet
d. Decrease the physical exertion
*e. Decrease the amount of table salt in  the diet
318. A man with arterial hypertension was recommended the following to increase the antihypertensive effect of a diuretic:
a. Increase the physical exertion
b. Decrease the physical exertion
c. Increase the amount of table salt in  the diet
*d. Decrease the amount of table salt in  the diet
e. Increase the amount of liquids in the  diet
319. A man with arterial hypertension was taking a beta blocker (bisoprolol) for a long time. When his condition improved, he suddenly stopped taking this drug and it resulted in an acute increase of his blood pressure. What complication of the therapy is it?
*a. Withdrawal syndrome
b. Bradycardia
c. Bronchospasm
d. Reduced sensitivity
e. Dysbacteriosis
320. A man with arterial hypertension was taking a beta blocker (bisoprolol) for a long time. When his condition improved, he suddenly stopped taking this drug and it resulted in an acute increase of his blood pressure. What complication of the therapy is it?
*a. Withdrawal syndrome
b. Bradycardia
c. Reduced sensitivity
d. Dysbacteriosis
e. Bronchospasm
321. A man with arterial hypertension was taking a beta blocker (bisoprolol) for a long time. When his condition improved, he suddenly stopped taking this drug and it resulted in an acute increase of his blood pressure. What complication of the therapy is it?
a. Dysbacteriosis
b. Bronchospasm
c. Bradycardia
*d. Withdrawal syndrome
e. Reduced sensitivity
322. A man with gastric ulcer is prescribed anti-Helicobacter pylori therapy. On the 3rd day the patient developed black coloring of feces. What had caused such changes?
a. Omeprazole
*b. Bismuth subcitrate
c. Metronidazole
d. Tetracycline
e. Tinidazole
323. A man with gastric ulcer is prescribed anti-Helicobacter pylori therapy. On the 3rd day the patient developed black coloring of feces. What had caused such changes?
a. Omeprazole
b. Tetracycline
c. Metronidazole
*d. Bismuth subcitrate
e. Tinidazole
324. A man with gastric ulcer is prescribed anti-Helicobacter pylori therapy. On the 3rd day the patient developed black coloring of feces. What had caused such changes?
a. Tinidazole
b. Tetracycline
*c. Bismuth subcitrate
d. Metronidazole
e. Omeprazole
325. A manager of a wholesale pharmaceutical company is responsible for relaying various tasks to the employees and supervises the fulfillment of assigned tasks. What management level corresponds with these duties?
a. Administrative
*b. Technical
c. Top-level
d. Institutional
e. Middle-level
326. A manager of a wholesale pharmaceutical company is responsible for relaying various tasks to the employees and supervises the fulfillment of assigned tasks. What management level corresponds with these duties?
a. Institutional
*b. Technical
c. Middle-level
d. Administrative
e. Top-level
327. A manager of a wholesale pharmaceutical company is responsible for relaying various tasks to the employees and supervises the fulfillment of assigned tasks. What management level corresponds with these duties?
a. Top-level
b. Middle-level
c. Administrative
d. Institutional
*e. Technical
328. A manufacturer plans to sell its new medicine directly to the consumers through its own network of pharmacies. What type of distribution channel is it?
*a. Direct distribution channel  (zero channel)
b. Three-level distribution channel
c. Four-level distribution channel
d. Two-level distribution channel
e. One-level distribution channel
329. A manufacturer plans to sell its new medicine directly to the consumers through its own network of pharmacies. What type of distribution channel is it?
*a. Direct distribution channel  (zero channel)
b. Two-level distribution channel
c. One-level distribution channel
d. Four-level distribution channel
e. Three-level distribution channel
330. A manufacturer plans to sell its new medicine directly to the consumers through its own network of pharmacies. What type of distribution channel is it?
a. One-level distribution channel
b. Two-level distribution channel
*c. Direct distribution channel  (zero channel)
d. Four-level distribution channel
e. Three-level distribution channel
331. A manufacturing company initiates changes to the package insert of a drug, which are aimed at limitation of its use. What type of marketing is used by the company in this case?
*a. Counteractive
b. Conversion
c. Synchromarketing
d. Stimulating
e. Remarketing
332. A manufacturing company initiates changes to the package insert of a drug, which are aimed at limitation of its use. What type of marketing is used by the company in this case?
*a. Counteractive
b. Synchromarketing
c. Conversion
d. Remarketing
e. Stimulating
333. A manufacturing company initiates changes to the package insert of a drug, which are aimed at limitation of its use. What type of marketing is used by the company in this case?
a. Conversion
b. Synchromarketing
*c. Counteractive
d. Remarketing
e. Stimulating
334. A marketer of a pharmaceutical enterprise uses primary and secondary marketing information for market analysis. What information is considered to be primary?
*a. Collected for the first time for a specific purpose
b. Published in mass media
c. Published in the company's annual report
d. Published in statistical reference books
e. Obtained from publications in scientific magazines
335. A marketer of a pharmaceutical enterprise uses primary and secondary marketing information for market analysis. What information is considered to be primary?
a. Obtained from publications in scientific magazines
b. Published in mass media
c. Published in the company's annual report
*d. Collected for the first time for a specific purpose
e. Published in statistical reference books
336. A marketer of a pharmaceutical enterprise uses primary and secondary marketing information for market analysis. What information is considered to be primary?
a. Published in the company's annual report
b. Published in statistical reference books
c. Published in mass media
d. Obtained from publications in scientific magazines
*e. Collected for the first time for a specific purpose
337. A marketing consultancy was comparing various drugs containing salbutamol. It was using such parameters as the cost of a treatment course, width of a distribution channel, frequency of medications, etc. The consultancy was determining the:
a. Life cycle stage of the drugs
*b. Competitiveness of the drugs
c. Market stability
d. Novelty of the drugs
e. Quality of the drugs
338. A marketing consultancy was comparing various drugs containing salbutamol. It was using such parameters as the cost of a treatment course, width of a distribution channel, frequency of medications, etc. The consultancy was determining the:
a. Novelty of the drugs
b. Quality of the drugs
*c. Competitiveness of the drugs
d. Life cycle stage of the drugs
e. Market stability
339. A marketing study found that the main group of consumers of venotonics are women aged 40 to 60 years. What principle is used for market segmentation in this case?
a. Behavioral approach
b. Geographical approach
*c. Demographic approach
d. Psychographic approach
e. -
340. A marketing study found that the main group of consumers of venotonics are women aged 40 to 60 years. What principle is used for market segmentation in this case?
a. Behavioral approach
b. Psychographic approach
c. -
d. Geographical approach
*e. Demographic approach
341. A marketing study found that the main group of consumers of venotonics are women aged 40 to 60 years. What principle is used for market segmentation in this case?
a. Psychographic approach
b. -
*c. Demographic approach
d. Geographical approach
e. Behavioral approach
342. A medical facility located in Kyiv buys its diagnostic tools from a domestic manufacturer. What level of distribution channel is it?
a. One-level channel
b. Three-level channel
c. Four-level channel
*d. Zero-level channel
e. Two-level channel
343. A medical facility located in Kyiv buys its diagnostic tools from a domestic manufacturer. What level of distribution channel is it?
a. Three-level channel
b. One-level channel
*c. Zero-level channel
d. Four-level channel
e. Two-level channel
344. A medical facility located in Kyiv buys its diagnostic tools from a domestic manufacturer. What level of distribution channel is it?
a. Two-level channel
*b. Zero-level channel
c. Three-level channel
d. Four-level channel
e. One-level channel
345. A medical facility purchases antitumor drugs directly from a domestic manufacturer. What is the level of the sales channel used in this case?
a. Four-level channel
b. Three-level channel
*c. Zero-level channel
d. Two-level channel
e. One-level channel
346. A medical facility purchases antitumor drugs directly from a domestic manufacturer. What is the level of the sales channel used in this case?
a. Two-level channel
b. Four-level channel
c. One-level channel
d. Three-level channel
*e. Zero-level channel
347. A medical facility purchases antitumor drugs directly from a domestic manufacturer. What is the level of the sales channel used in this case?
a. Two-level channel
b. Four-level channel
c. Three-level channel
d. One-level channel
*e. Zero-level channel
348. A medical product reaches its final consumer according to the following scheme: manufacturer rightarrow wholesale house rightarrow pharmacy rightarrow final consumer. Determine the level of the distribution channel:
a. Three-level channel
*b. Two-level channel
c. Zero-level channel
d. One-level channel
e. Four-level channel
349. A medical product reaches its final consumer according to the following scheme: manufacturer rightarrow wholesale house rightarrow pharmacy rightarrow final consumer. Determine the level of the distribution channel:
a. Three-level channel
b. One-level channel
c. Four-level channel
*d. Two-level channel
e. Zero-level channel
350. A medical product reaches its final consumer according to the following scheme: manufacturer rightarrow wholesale house rightarrow pharmacy rightarrow final consumer. Determine the level of the distribution channel:
a. Zero-level channel
*b. Two-level channel
c. Three-level channel
d. Four-level channel
e. One-level channel
351. A medicinal plant contains hydroxycoumarins and is used in production of venotonic agents. Name the herbal raw material harvested from this plant:
*a. Semina Hippocastani
b. Fructus Dauci carotae
c. Herba Meliloti
d. Fructus Pastinacae sativae
e. Fructus Ammi majoris
352. A medicinal plant contains hydroxycoumarins and is used in production of venotonic agents. Name the herbal raw material harvested from this plant:
a. Fructus Dauci carotae
b. Fructus Pastinacae sativae
*c. Semina Hippocastani
d. Fructus Ammi majoris
e. Herba Meliloti
353. A medicinal plant contains hydroxycoumarins and is used in production of venotonic agents. Name the herbal raw material harvested from this plant:
a. Herba Meliloti
b. Fructus Ammi majoris
c. Fructus Pastinacae sativae
*d. Semina Hippocastani
e. Fructus Dauci carotae
354. A medicine has caused a side effect in the patient due to the patient's hereditary defect of the enzymatic system. This phenomenon is called:
*a. Idiosyncrasy
b. Drug dependence
c. Withdrawal syndrome
d. Allergic response
e. Dysbiosis
355. A medicine has caused a side effect in the patient due to the patient's hereditary defect of the enzymatic system. This phenomenon is called:
a. Allergic response
*b. Idiosyncrasy
c. Drug dependence
d. Withdrawal syndrome
e. Dysbiosis
356. A medicine has caused a side effect in the patient due to the patient's hereditary defect of the enzymatic system. This phenomenon is called:
a. Dysbiosis
b. Drug dependence
*c. Idiosyncrasy
d. Withdrawal syndrome
e. Allergic response
357. A new medicine has appeared on the Ukrainian pharmaceutical market. It is characterized by low sales, low profits, and large marketing expenses for advertising. What stage of the product life cycle is it?
a. Decline
b. Saturation
c. Maturity
d. Growth
*e. Introduction
358. A new medicine has appeared on the Ukrainian pharmaceutical market. It is characterized by low sales, low profits, and large marketing expenses for advertising. What stage of the product life cycle is it?
a. Maturity
*b. Introduction
c. Saturation
d. Decline
e. Growth
359. A new medicine has appeared on the Ukrainian pharmaceutical market. It is characterized by low sales, low profits, and large marketing expenses for advertising. What stage of the product life cycle is it?
a. Saturation
b. Maturity
c. Decline
*d. Introduction
e. Growth
360. A paharmacist makes powders by grinding one of the formulation components with ethyl alcohol. This technology is typically applied when working with the following substance:
a. Bolus alba
b. Starch
*c. Streptocid
d. Talcum
e. Zinc oxide
361. A paharmacist makes powders by grinding one of the formulation components with ethyl alcohol. This technology is typically applied when working with the following substance:
a. Bolus alba
b. Talcum
c. Starch
d. Zinc oxide
*e. Streptocid
362. A paharmacist makes powders by grinding one of the formulation components with ethyl alcohol. This technology is typically applied when working with the following substance:
a. Starch
b. Zinc oxide
c. Talcum
*d. Streptocid
e. Bolus alba
363. A patient came to a pharmacy to buy a herbal antidepressant containing condensed anthracene derivatives and flavonoids. What herbal raw material is used to make this drug?
*a. Hyperici herba
b. Urticae folia
c. Uvae ursi folia
d. Filicis maris rhizomata
e. Rhodiolae roseae rhizomata et radiсes
364. A patient came to a pharmacy to buy a herbal antidepressant containing condensed anthracene derivatives and flavonoids. What herbal raw material is used to make this drug?
*a. Hyperici herba
b. Urticae folia
c. Uvae ursi folia
d. Rhodiolae roseae rhizomata et radiсes
e. Filicis maris rhizomata
365. A patient came to a pharmacy to buy a herbal antidepressant containing condensed anthracene derivatives and flavonoids. What herbal raw material is used to make this drug?
a. Uvae ursi folia
b. Rhodiolae roseae rhizomata et radiсes
*c. Hyperici herba
d. Filicis maris rhizomata
e. Urticae folia
366. A patient complaining of stuffy nose, fatigability, and headache came to a dispensing chemist. What medicine should be recommended to treat stuffy nose in this case?
*a. Xylometazoline
b. Dexamethasone
c. Acyclovir
d. Paracetamol
e. Lactulose
367. A patient complaining of stuffy nose, fatigability, and headache came to a dispensing chemist. What medicine should be recommended to treat stuffy nose in this case?
a. Acyclovir
*b. Xylometazoline
c. Lactulose
d. Paracetamol
e. Dexamethasone
368. A patient complaining of stuffy nose, fatigability, and headache came to a dispensing chemist. What medicine should be recommended to treat stuffy nose in this case?
a. Lactulose
b. Paracetamol
c. Dexamethasone
d. Acyclovir
*e. Xylometazoline
369. A patient developed dry cough while undergoing pharmacotherapy for arterial hypertension. What group of drugs can be characterized by this side effect?
*a. ACE inhibitors
b. Tranquilizers
c. Calcium antagonists
d. Antipsychotics
e. Antacids
370. A patient developed dry cough while undergoing pharmacotherapy for arterial hypertension. What group of drugs can be characterized by this side effect?
a. Tranquilizers
b. Calcium antagonists
c. Antacids
*d. ACE inhibitors
e. Antipsychotics
371. A patient developed dry cough while undergoing pharmacotherapy for arterial hypertension. What group of drugs can be characterized by this side effect?
a. Tranquilizers
b. Calcium antagonists
c. Antipsychotics
*d. ACE inhibitors
e. Antacids
372. A patient diagnosed with acute rhinitis was using xylometazoline drops. After 7 days of treatment, the patient notes that the effect of the medicine decreased and was not restored after an increase in the dosage. What medical term characterizes a sudden decrease in the sensitivity to a medicine?
*a. Tachyphylaxis
b. Tolerance
c. Synergism
d. Antagonism
e. Withdrawal syndrome
373. A patient diagnosed with acute rhinitis was using xylometazoline drops. After 7 days of treatment, the patient notes that the effect of the medicine decreased and was not restored after an increase in the dosage. What medical term characterizes a sudden decrease in the sensitivity to a medicine?
a. Antagonism
b. Tolerance
c. Withdrawal syndrome
d. Synergism
*e. Tachyphylaxis
374. A patient diagnosed with acute rhinitis was using xylometazoline drops. After 7 days of treatment, the patient notes that the effect of the medicine decreased and was not restored after an increase in the dosage. What medical term characterizes a sudden decrease in the sensitivity to a medicine?
a. Tolerance
*b. Tachyphylaxis
c. Withdrawal syndrome
d. Antagonism
e. Synergism
375. A patient diagnosed with hypertension and bronchial asthma had a bronchospasm attack, while undergoing therapy. What drug has most likely caused this complication?
*a. Propranolol
b. Fenoterol
c. Nitroglycerin
d. Amlodipine
e. Verapamil
376. A patient diagnosed with hypertension and bronchial asthma had a bronchospasm attack, while undergoing therapy. What drug has most likely caused this complication?
*a. Propranolol
b. Fenoterol
c. Verapamil
d. Amlodipine
e. Nitroglycerin
377. A patient diagnosed with hypertension and bronchial asthma had a bronchospasm attack, while undergoing therapy. What drug has most likely caused this complication?
a. Fenoterol
b. Nitroglycerin
*c. Propranolol
d. Verapamil
e. Amlodipine
378. A patient from the oncology department came to a pharmacy with a prescription for a drug that is needed for the treatment of his main disease. How will the pharmacist provide this medicine?
*a. 100% free
b. With a 10% discount
c. For the full cost
d. With a 25% discount
e. For 50% of the cost
379. A patient from the oncology department came to a pharmacy with a prescription for a drug that is needed for the treatment of his main disease. How will the pharmacist provide this medicine?
a. With a 10% discount
b. For 50% of the cost
c. With a 25% discount
d. For the full cost
*e. 100% free
380. A patient from the oncology department came to a pharmacy with a prescription for a drug that is needed for the treatment of his main disease. How will the pharmacist provide this medicine?
a. With a 25% discount
b. For the full cost
c. For 50% of the cost
d. With a 10% discount
*e. 100% free
381. A patient has been diagnosed with essential hypertension and prescribed an adequate treatment with antihypertensive drugs. However, two months later the patient began to notice a slight cough. What drug can cause this side effect?
a. -
b. Furosemide
c. Hypothiazide (Hydrochlorothiazide)
d. Amlodipine
*e. Captopril
382. A patient has been diagnosed with essential hypertension and prescribed an adequate treatment with antihypertensive drugs. However, two months later the patient began to notice a slight cough. What drug can cause this side effect?
a. Amlodipine
b. Hypothiazide (Hydrochlorothiazide)
c. -
d. Furosemide
*e. Captopril
383. A patient has been diagnosed with essential hypertension and prescribed an adequate treatment with antihypertensive drugs. However, two months later the patient began to notice a slight cough. What drug can cause this side effect?
a. Hypothiazide (Hydrochlorothiazide)
b. Furosemide
c. -
d. Amlodipine
*e. Captopril
384. A patient has been receiving palliative treatment with morphine hydrochloride for a week. Following that the patient demands continuation of this treatment. What phenomenon has occurred in this case?
*a. Dependence
b. Cumulation
c. Tolerance
d. Potentiation
e. Summation
385. A patient has been receiving palliative treatment with morphine hydrochloride for a week. Following that the patient demands continuation of this treatment. What phenomenon has occurred in this case?
*a. Dependence
b. Tolerance
c. Summation
d. Cumulation
e. Potentiation
386. A patient has been receiving palliative treatment with morphine hydrochloride for a week. Following that the patient demands continuation of this treatment. What phenomenon has occurred in this case?
a. Summation
b. Cumulation
c. Tolerance
*d. Dependence
e. Potentiation
387. A patient is 20 years old. After she was stung by a bee the patient developed Quincke's disease; rash in the form of blisters and papulae appeared on her torso. First aid in this case should start with administering the following drug:
a. Fresh frozen plasma
b. Haemodes
c. Rheopolyglukin (Dextran)
d. Penicillin
*e. Prednisolone
388. A patient is 20 years old. After she was stung by a bee the patient developed Quincke's disease; rash in the form of blisters and papulae appeared on her torso. First aid in this case should start with administering the following drug:
a. Penicillin
b. Rheopolyglukin (Dextran)
c. Haemodes
d. Fresh frozen plasma
*e. Prednisolone
389. A patient is 20 years old. After she was stung by a bee the patient developed Quincke's disease; rash in the form of blisters and papulae appeared on her torso. First aid in this case should start with administering the following drug:
a. Rheopolyglukin (Dextran)
*b. Prednisolone
c. Fresh frozen plasma
d. Penicillin
e. Haemodes
390. A patient is prescribed a 3% alcohol solution of boric acid. What concentration of ethanol should be taken to prepare this solution according to the normative documents?
a. 40%
b. 95%
c. 60%
d. 90%
*e. 70%
391. A patient is prescribed a 3% alcohol solution of boric acid. What concentration of ethanol should be taken to prepare this solution according to the normative documents?
a. 60%
b. 40%
c. 95%
d. 90%
*e. 70%
392. A patient is prescribed a 3% alcohol solution of boric acid. What concentration of ethanol should be taken to prepare this solution according to the normative documents?
a. 90%
b. 95%
*c. 70%
d. 40%
e. 60%
393. A patient measures out a necessary dose of a mixture, using a tablespoon. How many milliliters of liquid does one tablespoon contain?
*a. 15
b. 25
c. 10
d. 20
e. 5
394. A patient measures out a necessary dose of a mixture, using a tablespoon. How many milliliters of liquid does one tablespoon contain?
a. 25
*b. 15
c. 5
d. 10
e. 20
395. A patient measures out a necessary dose of a mixture, using a tablespoon. How many milliliters of liquid does one tablespoon contain?
a. 5
*b. 15
c. 10
d. 20
e. 25
396. A patient needs eye drops with riboflavin. What substance should the pharmacist add to the solution to ensure its isotonicity, if there are no specific instructions in the doctor's prescription?
a. Boric acid
b. Glucose
*c. Sodium chloride
d. Sodium nitrate
e. Sodium sulfate
397. A patient needs eye drops with riboflavin. What substance should the pharmacist add to the solution to ensure its isotonicity, if there are no specific instructions in the doctor's prescription?
a. Glucose
*b. Sodium chloride
c. Sodium nitrate
d. Boric acid
e. Sodium sulfate
398. A patient needs eye drops with riboflavin. What substance should the pharmacist add to the solution to ensure its isotonicity, if there are no specific instructions in the doctor's prescription?
a. Sodium nitrate
b. Glucose
*c. Sodium chloride
d. Sodium sulfate
e. Boric acid
399. A patient needs the pharmacy to prepare him a camphor ointment. What concentration of camphor should be in the ointment according to the regulatory documents?
*a. 10%
b. 5%
c. 20%
d. 1%
e. 15%
400. A patient needs the pharmacy to prepare him a camphor ointment. What concentration of camphor should be in the ointment according to the regulatory documents?
a. 20%
b. 15%
c. 1%
*d. 10%
e. 5%
401. A patient needs the pharmacy to prepare him a camphor ointment. What concentration of camphor should be in the ointment according to the regulatory documents?
a. 5%
*b. 10%
c. 20%
d. 15%
e. 1%
402. A patient receives heparin for acute myocardial infarction. On the third day the patient developed hematuria and subcutaneous hematomas. What medicine should be prescribed as an antidote in this case?
*a. Protamine sulfate
b. Vicasol (Menadione)
c. Streptokinase
d. Clopidogrel
e. Acetylsalicylic acid
403. A patient receives heparin for acute myocardial infarction. On the third day the patient developed hematuria and subcutaneous hematomas. What medicine should be prescribed as an antidote in this case?
a. Streptokinase
b. Clopidogrel
c. Acetylsalicylic acid
*d. Protamine sulfate
e. Vicasol (Menadione)
404. A patient receives heparin for acute myocardial infarction. On the third day the patient developed hematuria and subcutaneous hematomas. What medicine should be prescribed as an antidote in this case?
a. Vicasol (Menadione)
b. Acetylsalicylic acid
c. Clopidogrel
d. Streptokinase
*e. Protamine sulfate
405. A patient suffering from bronchial asthma was diagnosed with essential hypertension. What antihypertensive drug is contraindicated for this patient?
*a. Propranolol
b. Amlodipine
c. Verapamil
d. Hypothiazid (Hydrochlorothiazide)
e. Captopril
406. A patient suffering from bronchial asthma was diagnosed with essential hypertension. What antihypertensive drug is contraindicated for this patient?
a. Amlodipine
b. Verapamil
c. Captopril
*d. Propranolol
e. Hypothiazid (Hydrochlorothiazide)
407. A patient suffering from bronchial asthma was diagnosed with essential hypertension. What antihypertensive drug is contraindicated for this patient?
a. Verapamil
b. Captopril
c. Amlodipine
*d. Propranolol
e. Hypothiazid (Hydrochlorothiazide)
408. A patient suffers from avitaminosis C) The physician has prescribed a course of phytotherapy. What herbal raw material is rich in this vitamin?
*a. Fructus Sorbi
b. Cortex Quercus
c. Cortex Viburni opuli
d. Folium Menthae piperitae
e. Rhizoma Tormentillae
409. A patient suffers from avitaminosis C) The physician has prescribed a course of phytotherapy. What herbal raw material is rich in this vitamin?
a. Cortex Quercus
*b. Fructus Sorbi
c. Folium Menthae piperitae
d. Cortex Viburni opuli
e. Rhizoma Tormentillae
410. A patient suffers from avitaminosis C) The physician has prescribed a course of phytotherapy. What herbal raw material is rich in this vitamin?
a. Rhizoma Tormentillae
b. Cortex Quercus
c. Cortex Viburni opuli
*d. Fructus Sorbi
e. Folium Menthae piperitae
411. A patient was diagnosed with peptic ulcer disease of the stomach and prescribed a combined pharmacotherapy. Several days later, his feces turned black. What medicine is likely to cause this phenomenon?
a. Lansoprazole
*b. Bismuth subcitrate
c. Omeprazole
d. Famotidine
e. Ranitidine
412. A patient was diagnosed with peptic ulcer disease of the stomach and prescribed a combined pharmacotherapy. Several days later, his feces turned black. What medicine is likely to cause this phenomenon?
a. Lansoprazole
b. Famotidine
c. Ranitidine
*d. Bismuth subcitrate
e. Omeprazole
413. A patient was diagnosed with peptic ulcer disease of the stomach and prescribed a combined pharmacotherapy. Several days later, his feces turned black. What medicine is likely to cause this phenomenon?
a. Ranitidine
*b. Bismuth subcitrate
c. Lansoprazole
d. Famotidine
e. Omeprazole
414. A patient was prescribed an oral antibiotic for treatment and an antacid to remove heartburn symptoms. If the drugs are taken simultaneously their interaction can result in the following:
a. Acceleration of metabolism and excretion
b. Inhibition of hepatic microsomal enzymes
*c. Antibiotic malabsorption
d. Relative overdosage
e. Mutual potentiation
415. A patient was prescribed an oral antibiotic for treatment and an antacid to remove heartburn symptoms. If the drugs are taken simultaneously their interaction can result in the following:
a. Inhibition of hepatic microsomal enzymes
b. Acceleration of metabolism and excretion
c. Relative overdosage
*d. Antibiotic malabsorption
e. Mutual potentiation
416. A patient was prescribed an oral antibiotic for treatment and an antacid to remove heartburn symptoms. If the drugs are taken simultaneously their interaction can result in the following:
a. Inhibition of hepatic microsomal enzymes
b. Relative overdosage
c. Acceleration of metabolism and excretion
*d. Antibiotic malabsorption
e. Mutual potentiation
417. A patient with angina pectoris takes long-acting nitrates. Consult him what side-effect is the most common for these drugs:
*a. Headache
b. Vomiting
c. Constipation
d. Nausea
e. Diarrhea
418. A patient with angina pectoris takes long-acting nitrates. Consult him what side-effect is the most common for these drugs:
a. Constipation
b. Diarrhea
c. Nausea
d. Vomiting
*e. Headache
419. A patient with angina pectoris takes long-acting nitrates. Consult him what side-effect is the most common for these drugs:
a. Vomiting
*b. Headache
c. Constipation
d. Diarrhea
e. Nausea
420. A patient with arterial hypertension has been taking a beta-blocker (bisoprolol) for a long time. After his condition improved, he suddenly stopped taking this drug, which caused a sharp increase in the blood pressure. What complication of the therapy has occurred in this case?
a. Bradycardia
b. Reduced sensitivity
c. Dysbacteriosis
d. Bronchospasm
*e. Withdrawal syndrome
421. A patient with arterial hypertension has been taking a beta-blocker (bisoprolol) for a long time. After his condition improved, he suddenly stopped taking this drug, which caused a sharp increase in the blood pressure. What complication of the therapy has occurred in this case?
a. Dysbacteriosis
b. Bradycardia
c. Bronchospasm
d. Reduced sensitivity
*e. Withdrawal syndrome
422. A patient with arterial hypertension has been taking a beta-blocker (bisoprolol) for a long time. After his condition improved, he suddenly stopped taking this drug, which caused a sharp increase in the blood pressure. What complication of the therapy has occurred in this case?
a. Reduced sensitivity
*b. Withdrawal syndrome
c. Bradycardia
d. Bronchospasm
e. Dysbacteriosis
423. A patient with arterial hypertension has developed a dry cough in the course of his treatment. The doctor suspects a side effect caused by one of the medicines the patient was taking. This medicine most likely belongs to the following group:
a. Diuretics
*b. Angiotensin-converting-enzyme inhibitors
c. Calcium channel blockers
d. Imidazoline receptor blockers
e. Ganglionic blockers
424. A patient with arterial hypertension has developed a dry cough in the course of his treatment. The doctor suspects a side effect caused by one of the medicines the patient was taking. This medicine most likely belongs to the following group:
a. Diuretics
*b. Angiotensin-converting-enzyme inhibitors
c. Ganglionic blockers
d. Calcium channel blockers
e. Imidazoline receptor blockers
425. A patient with arterial hypertension has developed a dry cough in the course of his treatment. The doctor suspects a side effect caused by one of the medicines the patient was taking. This medicine most likely belongs to the following group:
a. Ganglionic blockers
*b. Angiotensin-converting-enzyme inhibitors
c. Calcium channel blockers
d. Diuretics
e. Imidazoline receptor blockers
426. A patient with arterial hypertension was prescribed enalapril, but after two weeks of treatment, taking this drug at the dose of 10 mg twice a day, the patient developed a dry non-productive cough. What is the likely cause of this side effect?
a. Increased tone of the cough center
b. Exacerbation of chronic bronchitis
c. Gastroesophageal reflux
*d. Accumulation of residual bradykinin in the blood
e. Inhibition of histamine synthesis
427. A patient with arterial hypertension was prescribed enalapril, but after two weeks of treatment, taking this drug at the dose of 10 mg twice a day, the patient developed a dry non-productive cough. What is the likely cause of this side effect?
a. Inhibition of histamine synthesis
b. Gastroesophageal reflux
*c. Accumulation of residual bradykinin in the blood
d. Increased tone of the cough center
e. Exacerbation of chronic bronchitis
428. A patient with arterial hypertension was prescribed enalapril, but after two weeks of treatment, taking this drug at the dose of 10 mg twice a day, the patient developed a dry non-productive cough. What is the likely cause of this side effect?
a. Inhibition of histamine synthesis
b. Increased tone of the cough center
c. Exacerbation of chronic bronchitis
d. Gastroesophageal reflux
*e. Accumulation of residual bradykinin in the blood
429. A patient with arterial hypertension, who takes captopril, was prescribed a potassium-sparing diuretic, spironolactone. What complication can develop in the patient due to this combination of drugs?
a. Hypocalcemia
b. Hypernatremia
c. Hypoglycemia
*d. Hyperkalemia
e. Hyponatremia
430. A patient with arterial hypertension, who takes captopril, was prescribed a potassium-sparing diuretic, spironolactone. What complication can develop in the patient due to this combination of drugs?
a. Hyponatremia
b. Hypernatremia
*c. Hyperkalemia
d. Hypocalcemia
e. Hypoglycemia
431. A patient with arterial hypertension, who takes captopril, was prescribed a potassium-sparing diuretic, spironolactone. What complication can develop in the patient due to this combination of drugs?
a. Hyponatremia
b. Hypocalcemia
c. Hypernatremia
*d. Hyperkalemia
e. Hypoglycemia
432. A patient with atrophic hypoacid gastritis type A has been diagnosed with a complication in the blood system - the development of B_12-deficiency anemia. What medicine is pathogenetically justified in this case?
*a. Cyanocobalamin
b. Nicotinic acid
c. Thiamine
d. Pyridoxine
e. Riboflavin
433. A patient with atrophic hypoacid gastritis type A has been diagnosed with a complication in the blood system - the development of B_12-deficiency anemia. What medicine is pathogenetically justified in this case?
a. Nicotinic acid
b. Thiamine
c. Riboflavin
*d. Cyanocobalamin
e. Pyridoxine
434. A patient with atrophic hypoacid gastritis type A has been diagnosed with a complication in the blood system - the development of B_12-deficiency anemia. What medicine is pathogenetically justified in this case?
a. Pyridoxine
b. Nicotinic acid
c. Thiamine
*d. Cyanocobalamin
e. Riboflavin
435. A patient with chronic heart failure, who has been taking cardiac glycosides, developed signs of glycoside intoxication. What antidote would be advisable in this case?
*a. Unithiol (DMPS)
b. Protamine
c. Naloxone
d. Methionine
e. Vicasol (Menadione)
436. A patient with chronic heart failure, who has been taking cardiac glycosides, developed signs of glycoside intoxication. What antidote would be advisable in this case?
a. Methionine
*b. Unithiol (DMPS)
c. Protamine
d. Naloxone
e. Vicasol (Menadione)
437. A patient with chronic heart failure, who has been taking cardiac glycosides, developed signs of glycoside intoxication. What antidote would be advisable in this case?
a. Vicasol (Menadione)
b. Methionine
c. Protamine
*d. Unithiol (DMPS)
e. Naloxone
438. A patient with exertional angina pectoris had been taking isosorbide mononitrate orally for 2 months, when this drug lost its effectiveness. What is the likely cause of isosorbide mononitrate being no longer effective in this case?
a. Cumulation
*b. Tolerance
c. Physical dependence
d. Psychological dependence
e. Sensitization
439. A patient with exertional angina pectoris had been taking isosorbide mononitrate orally for 2 months, when this drug lost its effectiveness. What is the likely cause of isosorbide mononitrate being no longer effective in this case?
a. Cumulation
*b. Tolerance
c. Psychological dependence
d. Physical dependence
e. Sensitization
440. A patient with exertional angina pectoris had been taking isosorbide mononitrate orally for 2 months, when this drug lost its effectiveness. What is the likely cause of isosorbide mononitrate being no longer effective in this case?
a. Cumulation
b. Psychological dependence
c. Sensitization
*d. Tolerance
e. Physical dependence
441. A patient with heart failure has developed an electrolyte imbalance against the background of diuretic treatment with furosemide. What imbalance has the patient developed?
*a. Hypokalemia
b. Hypernatremia
c. Hypermagnesemia
d. Hyperkalemia
e. Hypocalcemia
442. A patient with heart failure has developed an electrolyte imbalance against the background of diuretic treatment with furosemide. What imbalance has the patient developed?
*a. Hypokalemia
b. Hypernatremia
c. Hypermagnesemia
d. Hypocalcemia
e. Hyperkalemia
443. A patient with heart failure has developed an electrolyte imbalance against the background of diuretic treatment with furosemide. What imbalance has the patient developed?
a. Hypermagnesemia
b. Hyperkalemia
c. Hypocalcemia
*d. Hypokalemia
e. Hypernatremia
444. A patient with iron-deficiency anemia was prescribed iron sulfate. What side effect is characteristic of iron preparations?
*a. Constipation
b. Elevated blood pressure
c. Bradycardia
d. Dysbiosis
e. Osteoporosis
445. A patient with iron-deficiency anemia was prescribed iron sulfate. What side effect is characteristic of iron preparations?
a. Dysbiosis
b. Osteoporosis
c. Bradycardia
d. Elevated blood pressure
*e. Constipation
446. A patient with iron-deficiency anemia was prescribed iron sulfate. What side effect is characteristic of iron preparations?
a. Elevated blood pressure
b. Dysbiosis
c. Osteoporosis
d. Bradycardia
*e. Constipation
447. A patient with ischemic heart disease and chronic circulatory failure had been taking for a long time one of the drugs listed below. He developed hypokalemia, which resulted in cardiac rhythm disturbance and muscle weakness. What drug can lead to this complication as a side effect?
*a. Furosemide
b. Propranolol
c. Nifedipine
d. Lisinopril
e. Spironolactone
448. A patient with ischemic heart disease and chronic circulatory failure had been taking for a long time one of the drugs listed below. He developed hypokalemia, which resulted in cardiac rhythm disturbance and muscle weakness. What drug can lead to this complication as a side effect?
a. Lisinopril
b. Spironolactone
*c. Furosemide
d. Propranolol
e. Nifedipine
449. A patient with ischemic heart disease and chronic circulatory failure had been taking for a long time one of the drugs listed below. He developed hypokalemia, which resulted in cardiac rhythm disturbance and muscle weakness. What drug can lead to this complication as a side effect?
a. Spironolactone
b. Lisinopril
*c. Furosemide
d. Nifedipine
e. Propranolol
450. A patient with severe progression of bronchial asthma has been taking an inhalation corticosteroid for a long time to relieve asphyxia attacks. What side effect is the most likely to develop in this case?
a. Cushing's syndrome
b. Steroid diabetes
*c. Oral candidiasis
d. Osteoporosis
e. Osteoarthrosis
451. A patient with severe progression of bronchial asthma has been taking an inhalation corticosteroid for a long time to relieve asphyxia attacks. What side effect is the most likely to develop in this case?
a. Osteoarthrosis
b. Steroid diabetes
*c. Oral candidiasis
d. Osteoporosis
e. Cushing's syndrome
452. A patient with severe progression of bronchial asthma has been taking an inhalation corticosteroid for a long time to relieve asphyxia attacks. What side effect is the most likely to develop in this case?
a. Osteoporosis
*b. Oral candidiasis
c. Osteoarthrosis
d. Cushing's syndrome
e. Steroid diabetes
453. A patient, who for the last three weeks was taking a laxative  -  a decoction of Frangula bark, has noticed a significant decrease in its clinical effect. What is the name of this phenomenon?
a. Cumulation
*b. Tolerance
c. Sensitization
d. Withdrawal syndrome
e. Idiosyncrasy
454. A patient, who for the last three weeks was taking a laxative  -  a decoction of Frangula bark, has noticed a significant decrease in its clinical effect. What is the name of this phenomenon?
a. Sensitization
b. Idiosyncrasy
c. Withdrawal syndrome
d. Cumulation
*e. Tolerance
455. A patient, who for the last three weeks was taking a laxative  -  a decoction of Frangula bark, has noticed a significant decrease in its clinical effect. What is the name of this phenomenon?
a. Withdrawal syndrome
*b. Tolerance
c. Sensitization
d. Cumulation
e. Idiosyncrasy
456. A patient, who has been taking acetylsalicylic acid, developed hemorrhages of mucous membranes. This phenomenon is associated with:
a. Increased absorption in the gastrointestinal tract
b. Disorder of protein binding
*c. Inhibition of the prothrombin synthesis
d. Changed volume of distribution
e. Decreased absorption in the gastrointestinal tract
457. A patient, who has been taking acetylsalicylic acid, developed hemorrhages of mucous membranes. This phenomenon is associated with:
a. Increased absorption in the gastrointestinal tract
b. Disorder of protein binding
c. Decreased absorption in the gastrointestinal tract
d. Changed volume of distribution
*e. Inhibition of the prothrombin synthesis
458. A patient, who has been taking an expectorant, has developed complaints of hypersalivation, rhinitis, and itching skin rashes (signs of iodism). What medicine can cause these side effects?
*a. Potassium iodide
b. Infusion of Thermopsis grass
c. Ammonium chloride
d. Mucaltin
e. Ambroxol syrup
459. A patient, who has been taking an expectorant, has developed complaints of hypersalivation, rhinitis, and itching skin rashes (signs of iodism). What medicine can cause these side effects?
a. Ambroxol syrup
*b. Potassium iodide
c. Ammonium chloride
d. Mucaltin
e. Infusion of Thermopsis grass
460. A patient, who has been taking an expectorant, has developed complaints of hypersalivation, rhinitis, and itching skin rashes (signs of iodism). What medicine can cause these side effects?
a. Mucaltin
b. Infusion of Thermopsis grass
c. Ambroxol syrup
d. Ammonium chloride
*e. Potassium iodide
461. A patient, who has been taking warfarin for a long time, was recommended to take acetylsalicylic acid because of hyperthermic syndrome. What complication can be caused by such a combination of medicines?
a. Dysbacteriosis
b. Thrombus formation
c. Hyperkalemia
d. Hypokalemia
*e. Hemorrhages
462. A patient, who has been taking warfarin for a long time, was recommended to take acetylsalicylic acid because of hyperthermic syndrome. What complication can be caused by such a combination of medicines?
a. Hypokalemia
*b. Hemorrhages
c. Hyperkalemia
d. Thrombus formation
e. Dysbacteriosis
463. A patient, who has been taking warfarin for a long time, was recommended to take acetylsalicylic acid because of hyperthermic syndrome. What complication can be caused by such a combination of medicines?
a. Hypokalemia
b. Dysbacteriosis
c. Thrombus formation
*d. Hemorrhages
e. Hyperkalemia
464. A patient, who has undergone treatment for community-acquired pneumonia, complains of hearing impairment. What antibacterial drug could result in such a side-effect?
*a. Gentamicin
b. Ciprofloxacin
c. Clarithromycin
d. Amoxicillin/clavulanate
e. Cefazolin
465. A patient, who has undergone treatment for community-acquired pneumonia, complains of hearing impairment. What antibacterial drug could result in such a side-effect?
a. Amoxicillin/clavulanate
b. Ciprofloxacin
c. Clarithromycin
*d. Gentamicin
e. Cefazolin
466. A patient, who has undergone treatment for community-acquired pneumonia, complains of hearing impairment. What antibacterial drug could result in such a side-effect?
a. Clarithromycin
b. Amoxicillin/clavulanate
*c. Gentamicin
d. Ciprofloxacin
e. Cefazolin
467. A patient, who is undergoing treatment for ischemic heart disease, after physical exertion felt an acute pain in the cardiac area. What drug can be prescribed in this case for quick relief of the pain syndrome?
a. Corglycon (convallatoxin)
*b. Nitroglycerine
c. Enalapril
d. Prazosin
e. Captopril
468. A patient, who is undergoing treatment for ischemic heart disease, after physical exertion felt an acute pain in the cardiac area. What drug can be prescribed in this case for quick relief of the pain syndrome?
a. Enalapril
b. Corglycon (convallatoxin)
*c. Nitroglycerine
d. Prazosin
e. Captopril
469. A patient, who is undergoing treatment for ischemic heart disease, after physical exertion felt an acute pain in the cardiac area. What drug can be prescribed in this case for quick relief of the pain syndrome?
a. Enalapril
b. Prazosin
*c. Nitroglycerine
d. Captopril
e. Corglycon (convallatoxin)
470. A pharamacy has been licensed for wholesale distribution of medicinal products. What sales operation belongs to a wholesale distribution?
a. Sale of drugs to chronically ill patients
b. Sale of extemporal dosage forms
c. Sale of ready-to-use drugs
d. Sale of over-the-counter drugs
*e. Sale to other organizations for commercial use
471. A pharamacy has been licensed for wholesale distribution of medicinal products. What sales operation belongs to a wholesale distribution?
a. Sale of ready-to-use drugs
b. Sale of drugs to chronically ill patients
c. Sale of over-the-counter drugs
*d. Sale to other organizations for commercial use
e. Sale of extemporal dosage forms
472. A pharamacy has been licensed for wholesale distribution of medicinal products. What sales operation belongs to a wholesale distribution?
a. Sale of ready-to-use drugs
b. Sale of over-the-counter drugs
c. Sale of extemporal dosage forms
*d. Sale to other organizations for commercial use
e. Sale of drugs to chronically ill patients
473. A pharmaceutical analyst identifies the substance of potassium acetate. What reagent confirms the presence of potassium cation in the substance?
*a. Tartaric acid
b. Zinc oxide
c. Sodium hydroxide
d. Iron (III) chloride
e. Potassium permanganate
474. A pharmaceutical analyst identifies the substance of potassium acetate. What reagent confirms the presence of potassium cation in the substance?
a. Iron (III) chloride
b. Sodium hydroxide
c. Potassium permanganate
d. Zinc oxide
*e. Tartaric acid
475. A pharmaceutical analyst identifies the substance of potassium acetate. What reagent confirms the presence of potassium cation in the substance?
a. Potassium permanganate
b. Sodium hydroxide
*c. Tartaric acid
d. Iron (III) chloride
e. Zinc oxide
476. A pharmaceutical company can use different types of marketing, depending on the demand for the medicinal products that it produces. What type of demand makes it advisable to implement demarketing?
*a. Excessive
b. Negative
c. Declining
d. Satisfied
e. Absent
477. A pharmaceutical company can use different types of marketing, depending on the demand for the medicinal products that it produces. What type of demand makes it advisable to implement demarketing?
a. Absent
b. Satisfied
c. Declining
*d. Excessive
e. Negative
478. A pharmaceutical company can use different types of marketing, depending on the demand for the medicinal products that it produces. What type of demand makes it advisable to implement demarketing?
a. Negative
*b. Excessive
c. Satisfied
d. Absent
e. Declining
479. A pharmaceutical company develops the manufacture of new products. What part of the production procedures contains the description of the end product and lists its physical and chemical properties?
*a. Characteristics of the end product
b. Information materials
c. Characteristics of the raw stock, materials, and intermediate products
d. Description of the manufacturing process
e. Characteristics of the auxiliary raw stock and materials
480. A pharmaceutical company develops the manufacture of new products. What part of the production procedures contains the description of the end product and lists its physical and chemical properties?
a. Characteristics of the raw stock, materials, and intermediate products
*b. Characteristics of the end product
c. Characteristics of the auxiliary raw stock and materials
d. Description of the manufacturing process
e. Information materials
481. A pharmaceutical company develops the manufacture of new products. What part of the production procedures contains the description of the end product and lists its physical and chemical properties?
a. Information materials
b. Characteristics of the raw stock, materials, and intermediate products
*c. Characteristics of the end product
d. Description of the manufacturing process
e. Characteristics of the auxiliary raw stock and materials
482. A pharmaceutical company focuses on selling a diverse range of products covering different customer groups and regions. What kind of organizational structure is typical for such company?
*a. Divisional
b. Decentralized
c. Functional
d. Centralized
e. Bureaucratic
483. A pharmaceutical company focuses on selling a diverse range of products covering different customer groups and regions. What kind of organizational structure is typical for such company?
a. Bureaucratic
*b. Divisional
c. Decentralized
d. Centralized
e. Functional
484. A pharmaceutical company focuses on selling a diverse range of products covering different customer groups and regions. What kind of organizational structure is typical for such company?
a. Decentralized
b. Centralized
c. Bureaucratic
d. Functional
*e. Divisional
485. A pharmaceutical company has divided its customers into groups based on their gender, age, and size of their families. What approach to market segmentation is the basis of this customer division?
*a. Demographic
b. Geographic
c. Psychographic
d. Socioeconomic
e. Behavioral
486. A pharmaceutical company has divided its customers into groups based on their gender, age, and size of their families. What approach to market segmentation is the basis of this customer division?
a. Socioeconomic
*b. Demographic
c. Behavioral
d. Geographic
e. Psychographic
487. A pharmaceutical company has divided its customers into groups based on their gender, age, and size of their families. What approach to market segmentation is the basis of this customer division?
a. Socioeconomic
b. Psychographic
c. Behavioral
d. Geographic
*e. Demographic
488. A pharmaceutical company has launched a number of cold relief medicines in the form of syrups and lozenges for kids. What type of market segmentation was used by this company?
*a. Demographic
b. Psychographic
c. Geographical
d. -
e. Behavioral
489. A pharmaceutical company has launched a number of cold relief medicines in the form of syrups and lozenges for kids. What type of market segmentation was used by this company?
a. Behavioral
*b. Demographic
c. -
d. Geographical
e. Psychographic
490. A pharmaceutical company has launched a number of cold relief medicines in the form of syrups and lozenges for kids. What type of market segmentation was used by this company?
a. Behavioral
b. -
c. Geographical
d. Psychographic
*e. Demographic
491. A pharmaceutical company has opened several new regional offices and now searches for medical representatives. What stage of recruiting process is usually a final one?
a. Preliminary interview
b. Telephone interview
c. Filling in a questionnaire
d. Submission of a resume
*e. Targeted selection interview
492. A pharmaceutical company has opened several new regional offices and now searches for medical representatives. What stage of recruiting process is usually a final one?
a. Submission of a resume
b. Filling in a questionnaire
*c. Targeted selection interview
d. Telephone interview
e. Preliminary interview
493. A pharmaceutical company has opened several new regional offices and now searches for medical representatives. What stage of recruiting process is usually a final one?
a. Telephone interview
*b. Targeted selection interview
c. Preliminary interview
d. Submission of a resume
e. Filling in a questionnaire
494. A pharmaceutical company lacks the manufacturing power to satisfy the demand for certain medicines. The company increased the price of these medicines and stopped advertising them. What type of marketing is it?
a. Remarketing
*b. Demarketing
c. Synchromarketing
d. Stimulation marketing
e. Conversion marketing
495. A pharmaceutical company lacks the manufacturing power to satisfy the demand for certain medicines. The company increased the price of these medicines and stopped advertising them. What type of marketing is it?
a. Remarketing
b. Synchromarketing
*c. Demarketing
d. Stimulation marketing
e. Conversion marketing
496. A pharmaceutical company lacks the manufacturing power to satisfy the demand for certain medicines. The company increased the price of these medicines and stopped advertising them. What type of marketing is it?
a. Synchromarketing
*b. Demarketing
c. Remarketing
d. Conversion marketing
e. Stimulation marketing
497. A pharmaceutical company lowered its price for a certain drug due to strong competition and decreasing demand for this drug. What is the purpose of such price policy?
a. -
b. To create the image of high-quality medicine manufacturer
c. To maximize profits
d. To gain leadership due to high quality of manufactured medicines
*e. To ensure business survival
498. A pharmaceutical company lowered its price for a certain drug due to strong competition and decreasing demand for this drug. What is the purpose of such price policy?
a. To create the image of high-quality medicine manufacturer
b. -
c. To gain leadership due to high quality of manufactured medicines
d. To maximize profits
*e. To ensure business survival
499. A pharmaceutical company lowered its price for a certain drug due to strong competition and decreasing demand for this drug. What is the purpose of such price policy?
a. To maximize profits
b. To create the image of high-quality medicine manufacturer
c. To gain leadership due to high quality of manufactured medicines
*d. To ensure business survival
e. -
500. A pharmaceutical company makes medical products, special nutrient supplements, and medical cosmetics. What type of business activity is it?
*a. Manufacturing activity
b. -
c. Commercial activity
d. Financial activity
e. Financial and credit activity
501. A pharmaceutical company makes medical products, special nutrient supplements, and medical cosmetics. What type of business activity is it?
*a. Manufacturing activity
b. -
c. Commercial activity
d. Financial and credit activity
e. Financial activity
502. A pharmaceutical company makes medical products, special nutrient supplements, and medical cosmetics. What type of business activity is it?
a. -
b. Financial and credit activity
c. Commercial activity
*d. Manufacturing activity
e. Financial activity
503. A pharmaceutical company plans to introduce traditional herbal remedies to new markets. What marketing opportunity according to Ansoff Matrix was used by the company?
a. Consolidation
b. Diversification
c. Market penetration
*d. Market development
e. Product development
504. A pharmaceutical company plans to introduce traditional herbal remedies to new markets. What marketing opportunity according to Ansoff Matrix was used by the company?
a. Diversification
b. Consolidation
c. Product development
*d. Market development
e. Market penetration
505. A pharmaceutical company plans to introduce traditional herbal remedies to new markets. What marketing opportunity according to Ansoff Matrix was used by the company?
a. Market penetration
b. Product development
c. Consolidation
d. Diversification
*e. Market development
506. A pharmaceutical company plans to launch the production of a new medicine. What stage of product development includes making the cost estimates for its manufacturing and sales and preliminary calculations of the price and planned profits?
a. Commercial manufacturing
b. Filtration of the ideas
c. Generation of the ideas
d. Test marketing
*e. Economic analysis
507. A pharmaceutical company plans to launch the production of a new medicine. What stage of product development includes making the cost estimates for its manufacturing and sales and preliminary calculations of the price and planned profits?
a. Filtration of the ideas
b. Generation of the ideas
*c. Economic analysis
d. Commercial manufacturing
e. Test marketing
508. A pharmaceutical company plans to launch the production of a new medicine. What stage of product development includes making the cost estimates for its manufacturing and sales and preliminary calculations of the price and planned profits?
a. Generation of the ideas
*b. Economic analysis
c. Filtration of the ideas
d. Commercial manufacturing
e. Test marketing
509. A pharmaceutical company plans to sell its products in another country together with a foreign company. What type of company's entry to the foreign market is it?
a. Direct investments
b. Tender
*c. Joint venture
d. Import
e. Franchising
510. A pharmaceutical company plans to sell its products in another country together with a foreign company. What type of company's entry to the foreign market is it?
a. Import
*b. Joint venture
c. Tender
d. Direct investments
e. Franchising
511. A pharmaceutical company plans to sell its products in another country together with a foreign company. What type of company's entry to the foreign market is it?
a. Tender
b. Import
c. Direct investments
*d. Joint venture
e. Franchising
512. A pharmaceutical company plans to start selling its products abroad by transferring them into the ownersip of a foreign reseller. This company will enter the foreign market by means of:
*a. Export
b. Direct investments
c. Joint venture
d. Licensing
e. Franchise
513. A pharmaceutical company plans to start selling its products abroad by transferring them into the ownersip of a foreign reseller. This company will enter the foreign market by means of:
a. Franchise
b. Licensing
c. Joint venture
d. Direct investments
*e. Export
514. A pharmaceutical company plans to start selling its products abroad by transferring them into the ownersip of a foreign reseller. This company will enter the foreign market by means of:
a. Licensing
b. Joint venture
c. Direct investments
*d. Export
e. Franchise
515. A pharmaceutical company produces Lugol's iodine solution. By type of solvent this solution belongs to the following group:
*a. Glycerine solutions
b. Chloroform solutions
c. Alcohol solutions
d. Oil solutions
e. Water solutions
516. A pharmaceutical company produces Lugol's iodine solution. By type of solvent this solution belongs to the following group:
a. Alcohol solutions
b. Oil solutions
c. Water solutions
*d. Glycerine solutions
e. Chloroform solutions
517. A pharmaceutical company produces Lugol's iodine solution. By type of solvent this solution belongs to the following group:
a. Water solutions
b. Alcohol solutions
c. Chloroform solutions
*d. Glycerine solutions
e. Oil solutions
518. A pharmaceutical company produces a medicine under the brand name ''Corglyconum''. What herbal raw material is used in preparation of this drug?
*a. Lily-of-the-valley grass
b. Wormwood grass
c. Dandelion roots
d. Plantain foliage
e. Buckthorn bark
519. A pharmaceutical company produces a medicine under the brand name ''Corglyconum''. What herbal raw material is used in preparation of this drug?
a. Buckthorn bark
b. Plantain foliage
c. Wormwood grass
*d. Lily-of-the-valley grass
e. Dandelion roots
520. A pharmaceutical company produces a medicine under the brand name ''Corglyconum''. What herbal raw material is used in preparation of this drug?
a. Buckthorn bark
b. Wormwood grass
c. Plantain foliage
d. Dandelion roots
*e. Lily-of-the-valley grass
521. A pharmaceutical company produces animal-derived biostimulants. Solcoseryl preparation is obtained from the following raw material:
a. Bovine spleen
b. Human blood
*c. Bovine blood
d. Velvet antlers
e. Bovine trachea
522. A pharmaceutical company produces animal-derived biostimulants. Solcoseryl preparation is obtained from the following raw material:
a. Bovine trachea
b. Velvet antlers
c. Human blood
d. Bovine spleen
*e. Bovine blood
523. A pharmaceutical company produces animal-derived biostimulants. Solcoseryl preparation is obtained from the following raw material:
a. Velvet antlers
b. Human blood
*c. Bovine blood
d. Bovine spleen
e. Bovine trachea
524. A pharmaceutical company produces aromatic waters. Peppermint water should be prepared in the following proportion:
*a. 1:1000
b. 1:1
c. 1:10
d. 1:4000
e. 1:2000
525. A pharmaceutical company produces aromatic waters. Peppermint water should be prepared in the following proportion:
*a. 1:1000
b. 1:10
c. 1:4000
d. 1:1
e. 1:2000
526. A pharmaceutical company produces aromatic waters. Peppermint water should be prepared in the following proportion:
a. 1:4000
b. 1:10
c. 1:2000
d. 1:1
*e. 1:1000
527. A pharmaceutical company produces belladonna tincture. In the process of standardization, excessive content of active substances was detected. How can this situation be remedied?
*a. Dilute the tincture with extractant to normal concentration
b. This kind of deviation is not important
c. The tincture is a non-recoverable reject material
d. Filter the tincture through adsorbent
e. Precipitate excessive active substances
528. A pharmaceutical company produces belladonna tincture. In the process of standardization, excessive content of active substances was detected. How can this situation be remedied?
a. Precipitate excessive active substances
b. This kind of deviation is not important
c. The tincture is a non-recoverable reject material
d. Filter the tincture through adsorbent
*e. Dilute the tincture with extractant to normal concentration
529. A pharmaceutical company produces belladonna tincture. In the process of standardization, excessive content of active substances was detected. How can this situation be remedied?
a. This kind of deviation is not important
*b. Dilute the tincture with extractant to normal concentration
c. Precipitate excessive active substances
d. The tincture is a non-recoverable reject material
e. Filter the tincture through adsorbent
530. A pharmaceutical company produces biogenic stimulants. In the course of manufacturing process the raw materials are being subjected to adverse conditions. What is the purpose of this procedure?
a. Acceleration of bioactive substances extraction
*b. Formation of biostimulants
c. Prevention of hydrolysis of bioactive substances
d. Reducing the content of ballast substances
e. Extending the shelf life of raw materials
531. A pharmaceutical company produces biogenic stimulants. In the course of manufacturing process the raw materials are being subjected to adverse conditions. What is the purpose of this procedure?
a. Prevention of hydrolysis of bioactive substances
*b. Formation of biostimulants
c. Acceleration of bioactive substances extraction
d. Extending the shelf life of raw materials
e. Reducing the content of ballast substances
532. A pharmaceutical company produces biogenic stimulants. In the course of manufacturing process the raw materials are being subjected to adverse conditions. What is the purpose of this procedure?
a. Reducing the content of ballast substances
b. Acceleration of bioactive substances extraction
c. Extending the shelf life of raw materials
d. Prevention of hydrolysis of bioactive substances
*e. Formation of biostimulants
533. A pharmaceutical company produces deep-acting ointments. What is the mechanism of action of the active substances contained in resorptive ointments?
*a. Reach the systemic circulation and enhance the effect of drugs
b. Prevent drying and contamination of the epidermis
c. Protect the skin from external factors
d. Absorbed by the outer layers of the skin
e. Protect the skin from microbial infection
534. A pharmaceutical company produces deep-acting ointments. What is the mechanism of action of the active substances contained in resorptive ointments?
a. Absorbed by the outer layers of the skin
b. Protect the skin from external factors
c. Prevent drying and contamination of the epidermis
d. Protect the skin from microbial infection
*e. Reach the systemic circulation and enhance the effect of drugs
535. A pharmaceutical company produces deep-acting ointments. What is the mechanism of action of the active substances contained in resorptive ointments?
a. Prevent drying and contamination of the epidermis
b. Protect the skin from external factors
c. Protect the skin from microbial infection
*d. Reach the systemic circulation and enhance the effect of drugs
e. Absorbed by the outer layers of the skin
536. A pharmaceutical company produces essential oils via a method that consists of essential oil transfer into gas phase followed by its absorption with fats and then its extraction with alcohol. Name this method:
*a. Enfleurage
b. Extraction
c. Dynamic sorption
d. Hydrodistillation
e. Compression
537. A pharmaceutical company produces essential oils via a method that consists of essential oil transfer into gas phase followed by its absorption with fats and then its extraction with alcohol. Name this method:
*a. Enfleurage
b. Hydrodistillation
c. Compression
d. Dynamic sorption
e. Extraction
538. A pharmaceutical company produces essential oils via a method that consists of essential oil transfer into gas phase followed by its absorption with fats and then its extraction with alcohol. Name this method:
a. Hydrodistillation
b. Extraction
c. Compression
d. Dynamic sorption
*e. Enfleurage
539. A pharmaceutical company produces galenic preparations. These preparations contain:
a. Preservatives
b. Smell-correcting agents
c. Taste-correcting agents
d. Only one active substance
*e. A sum of active substances
540. A pharmaceutical company produces galenic preparations. These preparations contain:
a. Smell-correcting agents
*b. A sum of active substances
c. Taste-correcting agents
d. Preservatives
e. Only one active substance
541. A pharmaceutical company produces galenic preparations. These preparations contain:
a. Taste-correcting agents
b. Smell-correcting agents
c. Preservatives
d. Only one active substance
*e. A sum of active substances
542. A pharmaceutical company produces liquid dosage forms. What principle is used in rotary pulsation apparatus to obtain an emulsion?
*a. Mechanical dispersion
b. Maceration
c. Coacervation
d. Solubilization
e. Ultrasonic dispersion
543. A pharmaceutical company produces liquid dosage forms. What principle is used in rotary pulsation apparatus to obtain an emulsion?
*a. Mechanical dispersion
b. Solubilization
c. Ultrasonic dispersion
d. Coacervation
e. Maceration
544. A pharmaceutical company produces liquid dosage forms. What principle is used in rotary pulsation apparatus to obtain an emulsion?
a. Ultrasonic dispersion
b. Maceration
c. Coacervation
*d. Mechanical dispersion
e. Solubilization
545. A pharmaceutical company produces medicinal syrups. What substances ensure the microbial stability of this dosage form?
a. Pectin substances
b. Thickeners
c. Emulsifiers
*d. Preservatives
e. Solubilizers
546. A pharmaceutical company produces medicinal syrups. What substances ensure the microbial stability of this dosage form?
a. Solubilizers
b. Thickeners
*c. Preservatives
d. Emulsifiers
e. Pectin substances
547. A pharmaceutical company produces medicinal syrups. What substances ensure the microbial stability of this dosage form?
a. Thickeners
b. Emulsifiers
*c. Preservatives
d. Pectin substances
e. Solubilizers
548. A pharmaceutical company produces mint tincture. Technological process of making this tincture requires it to be made:
a. With 70% alcohol in 1:15 proportion
*b. With 90% alcohol in 1:20 proportion
c. With 70% alcohol in 1:5 proportion
d. With 48% alcohol in 1:2 proportion
e. With 70% alcohol in 1:10 proportion
549. A pharmaceutical company produces mint tincture. Technological process of making this tincture requires it to be made:
a. With 70% alcohol in 1:15 proportion
b. With 48% alcohol in 1:2 proportion
c. With 70% alcohol in 1:5 proportion
d. With 70% alcohol in 1:10 proportion
*e. With 90% alcohol in 1:20 proportion
550. A pharmaceutical company produces mint tincture. Technological process of making this tincture requires it to be made:
a. With 70% alcohol in 1:15 proportion
b. With 70% alcohol in 1:10 proportion
c. With 70% alcohol in 1:5 proportion
d. With 48% alcohol in 1:2 proportion
*e. With 90% alcohol in 1:20 proportion
551. A pharmaceutical company produces soft dosage forms. What indicator should be measured additionally for the soft dosage forms that are intended for application on heavily damaged skin?
a. Microbiological purity
b. pH
c. Quantitative determination
*d. Sterility
e. Identification
552. A pharmaceutical company produces soft dosage forms. What indicator should be measured additionally for the soft dosage forms that are intended for application on heavily damaged skin?
a. Quantitative determination
*b. Sterility
c. pH
d. Microbiological purity
e. Identification
553. A pharmaceutical company produces soft dosage forms. What indicator should be measured additionally for the soft dosage forms that are intended for application on heavily damaged skin?
a. Quantitative determination
b. pH
*c. Sterility
d. Identification
e. Microbiological purity
554. A pharmaceutical company produces sterile aqueous solutions for eye rinsing and moisturizing, as well as for impregnation of the materials that are applied to the eyes topically. Name these solutions:
a. Eye drops
b. Eye inserts
*c. Eye lotions
d. Eye ointments
e. Eye sprays
555. A pharmaceutical company produces sterile aqueous solutions for eye rinsing and moisturizing, as well as for impregnation of the materials that are applied to the eyes topically. Name these solutions:
a. Eye inserts
b. Eye drops
*c. Eye lotions
d. Eye sprays
e. Eye ointments
556. A pharmaceutical company produces sterile aqueous solutions for eye rinsing and moisturizing, as well as for impregnation of the materials that are applied to the eyes topically. Name these solutions:
a. Eye sprays
b. Eye ointments
*c. Eye lotions
d. Eye drops
e. Eye inserts
557. A pharmaceutical company produces suppositories made from thermolabile medicinal substances. What method is used in their production?
*a. Pressing
b. Dispersion
c. Steeping
d. Rolling
e. Pouring
558. A pharmaceutical company produces suppositories made from thermolabile medicinal substances. What method is used in their production?
a. Pouring
b. Rolling
*c. Pressing
d. Dispersion
e. Steeping
559. A pharmaceutical company produces suppositories made from thermolabile medicinal substances. What method is used in their production?
a. Rolling
b. Pouring
*c. Pressing
d. Dispersion
e. Steeping
560. A pharmaceutical company produces tablets. Tabletting by means of direct compression requires:
a. Prior homogenization
*b. No prior granulation
c. Formation of masses
d. Application of hydraulic press
e. Prior granulation
561. A pharmaceutical company produces tablets. Tabletting by means of direct compression requires:
a. Prior homogenization
b. Application of hydraulic press
*c. No prior granulation
d. Formation of masses
e. Prior granulation
562. A pharmaceutical company produces tablets. Tabletting by means of direct compression requires:
a. Prior homogenization
b. Formation of masses
c. Prior granulation
*d. No prior granulation
e. Application of hydraulic press
563. A pharmaceutical company produces various types of tablets. Specify the structure of matrix tablets:
*a. A reticular matrix that contains the medicinal substance
b. Tablets covered in a fat-soluble coating
c. A dispersion of medicinal substances in polyethylene
d. Tablets covered in a film coating
e. Tablets with a dragee coating
564. A pharmaceutical company produces various types of tablets. Specify the structure of matrix tablets:
a. Tablets covered in a film coating
b. A dispersion of medicinal substances in polyethylene
c. Tablets with a dragee coating
d. Tablets covered in a fat-soluble coating
*e. A reticular matrix that contains the medicinal substance
565. A pharmaceutical company produces various types of tablets. Specify the structure of matrix tablets:
a. Tablets with a dragee coating
b. A dispersion of medicinal substances in polyethylene
*c. A reticular matrix that contains the medicinal substance
d. Tablets covered in a film coating
e. Tablets covered in a fat-soluble coating
566. A pharmaceutical company produces warious medicines. Name the dosage form consisting of separate hard dry particles disintegrated to varying degree:
*a. Powders
b. Dried extract
c. Suspensions
d. Emulsions
e. Tablets
567. A pharmaceutical company produces warious medicines. Name the dosage form consisting of separate hard dry particles disintegrated to varying degree:
*a. Powders
b. Suspensions
c. Emulsions
d. Tablets
e. Dried extract
568. A pharmaceutical company produces warious medicines. Name the dosage form consisting of separate hard dry particles disintegrated to varying degree:
a. Dried extract
b. Suspensions
c. Emulsions
d. Tablets
*e. Powders
569. A pharmaceutical company promotes a healthy lifestyle, provides sponsorship to an orphanage, and funds sporting events. Name this concept of the company activity:
*a. Social responsibility
b. Financial activity
c. Manufacturing activity
d. -
e. Commercial activity
570. A pharmaceutical company promotes a healthy lifestyle, provides sponsorship to an orphanage, and funds sporting events. Name this concept of the company activity:
a. -
b. Commercial activity
*c. Social responsibility
d. Manufacturing activity
e. Financial activity
571. A pharmaceutical company promotes a healthy lifestyle, provides sponsorship to an orphanage, and funds sporting events. Name this concept of the company activity:
a. -
b. Financial activity
c. Manufacturing activity
d. Commercial activity
*e. Social responsibility
572. A pharmaceutical company provides its employees with free lunches. What needs does it try to satisfy according to Maslow's theory of motivation?
*a. Physiological
b. Self-actualisation
c. Esteem
d. Social (involvement in the events)
e. Safety and protection
573. A pharmaceutical company provides its employees with free lunches. What needs does it try to satisfy according to Maslow's theory of motivation?
a. Esteem
b. Self-actualisation
c. Social (involvement in the events)
d. Safety and protection
*e. Physiological
574. A pharmaceutical company provides its employees with free lunches. What needs does it try to satisfy according to Maslow's theory of motivation?
a. Safety and protection
b. Self-actualisation
c. Esteem
d. Social (involvement in the events)
*e. Physiological
575. A pharmaceutical company studies the life cycle of a drug that is being introduced to the market. Name the stage, when sales volume grows slowly and large investments in organization of sales and manufacturing are necessary.
*a. Market entry
b. Testing phase
c. Decline phase
d. Saturation phase
e. Maturity phase
576. A pharmaceutical company studies the life cycle of a drug that is being introduced to the market. Name the stage, when sales volume grows slowly and large investments in organization of sales and manufacturing are necessary.
a. Decline phase
b. Saturation phase
*c. Market entry
d. Testing phase
e. Maturity phase
577. A pharmaceutical company studies the life cycle of a drug that is being introduced to the market. Name the stage, when sales volume grows slowly and large investments in organization of sales and manufacturing are necessary.
a. Maturity phase
*b. Market entry
c. Testing phase
d. Saturation phase
e. Decline phase
578. A pharmaceutical company that has been producing nasal drops begins to produce the same drug in a spray dosage form. What marketing approach does this company choose in its relationship with customers?
a. Intensification of commercial effort
b. Manufacture improvement
c. Socioethical marketing
d. Sales improvement
*e. Product improvement
579. A pharmaceutical company that has been producing nasal drops begins to produce the same drug in a spray dosage form. What marketing approach does this company choose in its relationship with customers?
a. Intensification of commercial effort
b. Sales improvement
*c. Product improvement
d. Socioethical marketing
e. Manufacture improvement
580. A pharmaceutical company that has been producing nasal drops begins to produce the same drug in a spray dosage form. What marketing approach does this company choose in its relationship with customers?
a. Socioethical marketing
b. Manufacture improvement
c. Sales improvement
d. Intensification of commercial effort
*e. Product improvement
581. A pharmaceutical company that specializes in the manufacture of herbal medicines is expanding its scope of work and establises the production of cosmetics. What development strategy did the company choose?
*a. Diversification
b. Survival
c. Stability
d. Modernization
e. -
582. A pharmaceutical company that specializes in the manufacture of herbal medicines is expanding its scope of work and establises the production of cosmetics. What development strategy did the company choose?
a. Modernization
b. -
c. Survival
*d. Diversification
e. Stability
583. A pharmaceutical company that specializes in the manufacture of herbal medicines is expanding its scope of work and establises the production of cosmetics. What development strategy did the company choose?
a. Stability
b. Survival
*c. Diversification
d. Modernization
e. -
584. A pharmaceutical company uses the Boston Consulting Group matrix to analyze the state of its strategic business units (drugs). What is the BCG Matrix based on?
*a. Market share and market growth rate
b. Business opportunities
c. Market segments
d. Competitive Intensity
e. Attractiveness of the industry
585. A pharmaceutical company uses the Boston Consulting Group matrix to analyze the state of its strategic business units (drugs). What is the BCG Matrix based on?
*a. Market share and market growth rate
b. Market segments
c. Attractiveness of the industry
d. Competitive Intensity
e. Business opportunities
586. A pharmaceutical company uses the Boston Consulting Group matrix to analyze the state of its strategic business units (drugs). What is the BCG Matrix based on?
a. Market segments
*b. Market share and market growth rate
c. Competitive Intensity
d. Business opportunities
e. Attractiveness of the industry
587. A pharmaceutical company uses various methods of advertising. What method of advertising foresees its distribution to everyone, not just the target audience?
a. -
*b. Out-of-home advertising
c. Postal cards and pamphlets
d. Professional-targeted advertising
e. Advertising souvenirs
588. A pharmaceutical company uses various methods of advertising. What method of advertising foresees its distribution to everyone, not just the target audience?
a. Postal cards and pamphlets
b. -
c. Professional-targeted advertising
d. Advertising souvenirs
*e. Out-of-home advertising
589. A pharmaceutical company uses various methods of advertising. What method of advertising foresees its distribution to everyone, not just the target audience?
a. Postal cards and pamphlets
b. Advertising souvenirs
c. -
*d. Out-of-home advertising
e. Professional-targeted advertising
590. A pharmaceutical company wants to strengten its position in the competitive market environment. It decides to use brand names as a part of its trade policy. What is the purpose of a brand name?
*a. Differentiation between the  competing medicines on the market
b. It is a mandatory condition to be able to sell medicines at a reduced price to certain population groups
c. Eligibility for registration in the List of medicines and medical products with state-controlled prices
d. Justification of a higher price for the medicine
e. Ensuring the necessary quality of  medicines
591. A pharmaceutical company wants to strengten its position in the competitive market environment. It decides to use brand names as a part of its trade policy. What is the purpose of a brand name?
a. Ensuring the necessary quality of  medicines
b. It is a mandatory condition to be able to sell medicines at a reduced price to certain population groups
c. Justification of a higher price for the medicine
*d. Differentiation between the  competing medicines on the market
e. Eligibility for registration in the List of medicines and medical products with state-controlled prices
592. A pharmaceutical company wants to strengten its position in the competitive market environment. It decides to use brand names as a part of its trade policy. What is the purpose of a brand name?
a. Justification of a higher price for the medicine
b. It is a mandatory condition to be able to sell medicines at a reduced price to certain population groups
*c. Differentiation between the  competing medicines on the market
d. Eligibility for registration in the List of medicines and medical products with state-controlled prices
e. Ensuring the necessary quality of  medicines
593. A pharmaceutical company, wanting to strengthen its market position in a competitive environment, decided to use trademarks during the implementation of its product policy. What is the purpose of a trademark?
a. Market segmentation
b. Study of quantitative characteristics of the market
c. Determining the need for medicines
*d. Differentiation and protection of the company-produced medicines on the market
e. Marketing research
594. A pharmaceutical company, wanting to strengthen its market position in a competitive environment, decided to use trademarks during the implementation of its product policy. What is the purpose of a trademark?
a. Marketing research
b. Determining the need for medicines
c. Market segmentation
d. Study of quantitative characteristics of the market
*e. Differentiation and protection of the company-produced medicines on the market
595. A pharmaceutical company, wanting to strengthen its market position in a competitive environment, decided to use trademarks during the implementation of its product policy. What is the purpose of a trademark?
a. Marketing research
b. Determining the need for medicines
c. Study of quantitative characteristics of the market
d. Market segmentation
*e. Differentiation and protection of the company-produced medicines on the market
596. A pharmaceutical factory prepares syrups for taste-masking of medicines. What substance must be removed from such syrups to prevent jellification of the end product?
a. Glucose
*b. Pectin
c. Sucrose
d. Fructose
e. Starch
597. A pharmaceutical factory prepares syrups for taste-masking of medicines. What substance must be removed from such syrups to prevent jellification of the end product?
a. Glucose
b. Fructose
c. Sucrose
d. Starch
*e. Pectin
598. A pharmaceutical factory prepares syrups for taste-masking of medicines. What substance must be removed from such syrups to prevent jellification of the end product?
a. Sucrose
b. Glucose
c. Starch
d. Fructose
*e. Pectin
599. A pharmaceutical factory produces Thiamazole (Merkazolil) that is a medicinal substance with an antithyroid effect. Select from the list one of the initial compounds in its synthesis.
a. Acridine
b. Hydroxyquinoline
*c. Methyl isothiocyanate
d. Naphthoquinone
e. Furfural
600. A pharmaceutical factory produces Thiamazole (Merkazolil) that is a medicinal substance with an antithyroid effect. Select from the list one of the initial compounds in its synthesis.
a. Furfural
b. Hydroxyquinoline
c. Acridine
*d. Methyl isothiocyanate
e. Naphthoquinone
601. A pharmaceutical factory produces Thiamazole (Merkazolil) that is a medicinal substance with an antithyroid effect. Select from the list one of the initial compounds in its synthesis.
a. Hydroxyquinoline
*b. Methyl isothiocyanate
c. Acridine
d. Furfural
e. Naphthoquinone
602. A pharmaceutical factory produces antimicrobial agent nitrofurazone (Nitrofural, Furacilin). What initial substance is used in its synthesis?
*a. Furfural
b. Resorcinol
c. Hydroxyquinoline
d. Benzaldehyde
e. Aniline
603. A pharmaceutical factory produces antimicrobial agent nitrofurazone (Nitrofural, Furacilin). What initial substance is used in its synthesis?
a. Aniline
*b. Furfural
c. Resorcinol
d. Hydroxyquinoline
e. Benzaldehyde
604. A pharmaceutical factory produces antimicrobial agent nitrofurazone (Nitrofural, Furacilin). What initial substance is used in its synthesis?
a. Benzaldehyde
b. Hydroxyquinoline
*c. Furfural
d. Aniline
e. Resorcinol
605. A pharmaceutical factory produces juices from fresh herbal raw materials. What technological operation is performed at the stage of juice purification?
*a. Heating followed by rapid cooling
b. Crystallization
c. Filtration
d. Sedimentation
e. Adsorption
606. A pharmaceutical factory produces juices from fresh herbal raw materials. What technological operation is performed at the stage of juice purification?
a. Crystallization
b. Sedimentation
c. Filtration
d. Adsorption
*e. Heating followed by rapid cooling
607. A pharmaceutical factory produces juices from fresh herbal raw materials. What technological operation is performed at the stage of juice purification?
a. Sedimentation
b. Crystallization
c. Adsorption
d. Filtration
*e. Heating followed by rapid cooling
608. A pharmaceutical factory produces medicinal syrups. What substances ensure microbial stability of this dosage form?
*a. Preservatives
b. Pectic materials
c. Emulsifiers
d. Solubilizers
e. Thickeners
609. A pharmaceutical factory produces medicinal syrups. What substances ensure microbial stability of this dosage form?
*a. Preservatives
b. Pectic materials
c. Thickeners
d. Solubilizers
e. Emulsifiers
610. A pharmaceutical factory produces medicinal syrups. What substances ensure microbial stability of this dosage form?
a. Pectic materials
*b. Preservatives
c. Thickeners
d. Emulsifiers
e. Solubilizers
611. A pharmaceutical factory produces ointments. Name the stage of the manufacturung process that allows to obtain a uniform ointment:
*a. Homogenization
b. Dispersion
c. Mixing components with the vehicle
d. Ointment concentrate production
e. Vehicle production
612. A pharmaceutical factory produces ointments. Name the stage of the manufacturung process that allows to obtain a uniform ointment:
a. Mixing components with the vehicle
b. Dispersion
c. Ointment concentrate production
*d. Homogenization
e. Vehicle production
613. A pharmaceutical factory produces ointments. Name the stage of the manufacturung process that allows to obtain a uniform ointment:
a. Ointment concentrate production
b. Vehicle production
*c. Homogenization
d. Mixing components with the vehicle
e. Dispersion
614. A pharmaceutical factory produces soft dosage forms. What soft dosage form melts at the body temperature?
a. Cream
b. Ointment
c. Paste
d. Gel
*e. Liniment
615. A pharmaceutical factory produces soft dosage forms. What soft dosage form melts at the body temperature?
a. Ointment
*b. Liniment
c. Paste
d. Cream
e. Gel
616. A pharmaceutical factory produces soft dosage forms. What soft dosage form melts at the body temperature?
a. Ointment
b. Gel
c. Cream
*d. Liniment
e. Paste
617. A pharmaceutical factory produces suppositories with hydrophilic bases. What parameter is measured during standardization of such suppositories?
a. Boiling point
*b. Dissolution time
c. Dry residue
d. Resuspension
e. Mechanical strength
618. A pharmaceutical factory produces suppositories with hydrophilic bases. What parameter is measured during standardization of such suppositories?
a. Mechanical strength
b. Dry residue
c. Resuspension
*d. Dissolution time
e. Boiling point
619. A pharmaceutical factory produces suppositories with hydrophilic bases. What parameter is measured during standardization of such suppositories?
a. Resuspension
b. Boiling point
c. Dry residue
*d. Dissolution time
e. Mechanical strength
620. A pharmaceutical factory produces tablets of sodium chloride. What is the method of their poduction?
a. Direct compression with the addition of excipients
*b. Direct compression without additional substances
c. Wet granulation prior to compression
d. Dry granulation prior to compression
e. Moulding
621. A pharmaceutical factory produces tablets of sodium chloride. What is the method of their poduction?
a. Direct compression with the addition of excipients
b. Moulding
c. Wet granulation prior to compression
*d. Direct compression without additional substances
e. Dry granulation prior to compression
622. A pharmaceutical factory produces tablets of sodium chloride. What is the method of their poduction?
a. Wet granulation prior to compression
b. Direct compression with the addition of excipients
*c. Direct compression without additional substances
d. Moulding
e. Dry granulation prior to compression
623. A pharmaceutical factory produces various types of tablets. What is the purpose of Solublettaе tablets?
*a. Preparation of solutions for various pharmaceutical purposes
b. Implantation
c. Sublingual administration
d. Preparation of solutions for injections
e. Rectal administration
624. A pharmaceutical factory produces various types of tablets. What is the purpose of Solublettaе tablets?
*a. Preparation of solutions for various pharmaceutical purposes
b. Preparation of solutions for injections
c. Rectal administration
d. Sublingual administration
e. Implantation
625. A pharmaceutical factory produces various types of tablets. What is the purpose of Solublettaе tablets?
a. Sublingual administration
b. Rectal administration
c. Preparation of solutions for injections
d. Implantation
*e. Preparation of solutions for various pharmaceutical purposes
626. A pharmaceutical factory uses dragee machines to apply multiple layers of active substances and adjuvants to sugar granules. The end product of this process is the following dosage form:
*a. Dragee
b. Dragee tablets
c. Granules
d. Microcapsules
e. Spansules with polymer coating
627. A pharmaceutical factory uses dragee machines to apply multiple layers of active substances and adjuvants to sugar granules. The end product of this process is the following dosage form:
a. Microcapsules
b. Dragee tablets
*c. Dragee
d. Granules
e. Spansules with polymer coating
628. A pharmaceutical factory uses dragee machines to apply multiple layers of active substances and adjuvants to sugar granules. The end product of this process is the following dosage form:
a. Microcapsules
b. Spansules with polymer coating
*c. Dragee
d. Granules
e. Dragee tablets
629. A pharmaceutical factory uses maceration technique to produce tinctures. How long must herbal raw materials be steeped according to this technique?
*a. 7 days
b. 5 days
c. 2 days
d. 12 hours
e. 24 hours
630. A pharmaceutical factory uses maceration technique to produce tinctures. How long must herbal raw materials be steeped according to this technique?
a. 24 hours
b. 12 hours
*c. 7 days
d. 5 days
e. 2 days
631. A pharmaceutical factory uses maceration technique to produce tinctures. How long must herbal raw materials be steeped according to this technique?
a. 5 days
b. 12 hours
*c. 7 days
d. 24 hours
e. 2 days
632. A pharmaceutical manufacturer forms marketing teams responsible for a particular product or a group of products (medicines). What model of marketing organization does the company use in this case?
*a. Product-based marketing
b. Regional marketing
c. Combined marketing (matrix model)
d. Functional marketing
e. Segment marketing
633. A pharmaceutical manufacturer forms marketing teams responsible for a particular product or a group of products (medicines). What model of marketing organization does the company use in this case?
a. Combined marketing (matrix model)
b. Regional marketing
c. Functional marketing
*d. Product-based marketing
e. Segment marketing
634. A pharmaceutical manufacturer forms marketing teams responsible for a particular product or a group of products (medicines). What model of marketing organization does the company use in this case?
a. Functional marketing
b. Combined marketing (matrix model)
c. Regional marketing
d. Segment marketing
*e. Product-based marketing
635. A pharmaceutical manufacturer sets the price for a drug basing on its prime cost with premium. What model of pricing is it?
*a. Cost-based
b. Supply-based
c. Competitive
d. Demand-based
e. Breakeven
636. A pharmaceutical manufacturer sets the price for a drug basing on its prime cost with premium. What model of pricing is it?
a. Competitive
b. Demand-based
c. Breakeven
*d. Cost-based
e. Supply-based
637. A pharmaceutical manufacturer sets the price for a drug basing on its prime cost with premium. What model of pricing is it?
a. Demand-based
b. Breakeven
c. Supply-based
*d. Cost-based
e. Competitive
638. A pharmaceutical warehouse has received a batch of herbal raw material - a bark of Quercus robur. What active substances should be measured in this material, according to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine?
a. Coumarins
*b. Tannins
c. Anthracene derivatives
d. Flavonoids
e. Essential oils
639. A pharmaceutical warehouse has received a batch of herbal raw material - a bark of Quercus robur. What active substances should be measured in this material, according to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine?
a. Coumarins
b. Flavonoids
c. Anthracene derivatives
*d. Tannins
e. Essential oils
640. A pharmaceutical warehouse has received a batch of herbal raw material - a bark of Quercus robur. What active substances should be measured in this material, according to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine?
a. Flavonoids
*b. Tannins
c. Anthracene derivatives
d. Coumarins
e. Essential oils
641. A pharmaceutical warehouse has received a batch of herbal raw material - hawthorn flowers. Merchandise analysis revealed in one of the sacks significant amount of bird-cherry flowers besides the hawthorn. What quality assessment of the herbal raw material should be performed?
a. Mineral admixtures
b. Ash values (Total ash)
*c. Acceptable admixtures
d. Extractive values
e. Moisture content
642. A pharmaceutical warehouse has received a batch of herbal raw material - hawthorn flowers. Merchandise analysis revealed in one of the sacks significant amount of bird-cherry flowers besides the hawthorn. What quality assessment of the herbal raw material should be performed?
a. Moisture content
*b. Acceptable admixtures
c. Mineral admixtures
d. Extractive values
e. Ash values (Total ash)
643. A pharmaceutical warehouse has received a batch of herbal raw material - hawthorn flowers. Merchandise analysis revealed in one of the sacks significant amount of bird-cherry flowers besides the hawthorn. What quality assessment of the herbal raw material should be performed?
a. Moisture content
b. Mineral admixtures
c. Ash values (Total ash)
d. Extractive values
*e. Acceptable admixtures
644. A pharmaceutical warehouse received a herbal raw material that consists of ''cones'' with loose scales that are attached to a firm twig with or without fruits. Its collective fruits are pale green, fragrant, and bitter. Name the plant from which this herbal raw material was harvested:
*a. Humulus lupulus
b. Olea europeaea
c. Rubus idaeus
d. Juniperus communis
e. Alnus incana
645. A pharmaceutical warehouse received a herbal raw material that consists of ''cones'' with loose scales that are attached to a firm twig with or without fruits. Its collective fruits are pale green, fragrant, and bitter. Name the plant from which this herbal raw material was harvested:
a. Alnus incana
b. Rubus idaeus
*c. Humulus lupulus
d. Olea europeaea
e. Juniperus communis
646. A pharmaceutical warehouse received a herbal raw material that consists of ''cones'' with loose scales that are attached to a firm twig with or without fruits. Its collective fruits are pale green, fragrant, and bitter. Name the plant from which this herbal raw material was harvested:
a. Olea europeaea
b. Alnus incana
*c. Humulus lupulus
d. Juniperus communis
e. Rubus idaeus
647. A pharmaceutical wholesaler constantly monitors expiration dates of medicines and their storage and transportation conditions. What type of control is exercised in this case?
*a. Ongoing
b. Final
c. Financial
d. Preliminary
e. Social
648. A pharmaceutical wholesaler constantly monitors expiration dates of medicines and their storage and transportation conditions. What type of control is exercised in this case?
*a. Ongoing
b. Final
c. Social
d. Preliminary
e. Financial
649. A pharmaceutical wholesaler constantly monitors expiration dates of medicines and their storage and transportation conditions. What type of control is exercised in this case?
a. Final
b. Financial
c. Social
d. Preliminary
*e. Ongoing
650. A pharmaceutical wholesaler has suffered commercial losses because of unpaid debts of a pharmacy network. What type of commercial losses is it?
a. Labor
*b. Financial
c. Special
d. -
e. Material
651. A pharmaceutical wholesaler has suffered commercial losses because of unpaid debts of a pharmacy network. What type of commercial losses is it?
a. Labor
b. Material
*c. Financial
d. Special
e. -
652. A pharmaceutical wholesaler has suffered commercial losses because of unpaid debts of a pharmacy network. What type of commercial losses is it?
a. Labor
b. Material
c. Special
*d. Financial
e. -
653. A pharmaceutical wholesaler sells ointment bases (vaseline, lanolin, etc.) in bulk ("an gross") to the pharmacies that make extemporaneous compounds. What sales method (type of distribution) is typical for selling these goods?
*a. Selective method
b. Mass sales method
c. -
d. Intensive method
e. Integrated method
654. A pharmaceutical wholesaler sells ointment bases (vaseline, lanolin, etc.) in bulk ("an gross") to the pharmacies that make extemporaneous compounds. What sales method (type of distribution) is typical for selling these goods?
a. Integrated method
b. -
*c. Selective method
d. Mass sales method
e. Intensive method
655. A pharmaceutical wholesaler sells ointment bases (vaseline, lanolin, etc.) in bulk ("an gross") to the pharmacies that make extemporaneous compounds. What sales method (type of distribution) is typical for selling these goods?
a. Mass sales method
b. -
c. Integrated method
*d. Selective method
e. Intensive method
656. A pharmacist approached the chief manager of the pharmacy with a proposition to introduce an additional service for their customers - blood pressure measurement. What type of communication is it?
a. External
b. Horizontal
*c. Vertical ascending
d. Vertical descending
e. Intra-level
657. A pharmacist approached the chief manager of the pharmacy with a proposition to introduce an additional service for their customers - blood pressure measurement. What type of communication is it?
a. External
b. Vertical descending
*c. Vertical ascending
d. Intra-level
e. Horizontal
658. A pharmacist approached the chief manager of the pharmacy with a proposition to introduce an additional service for their customers - blood pressure measurement. What type of communication is it?
a. Vertical descending
b. Intra-level
c. Horizontal
*d. Vertical ascending
e. External
659. A pharmacist approached the chief manager of the pharmacy with a request for pay raise. The chief manager turned down this request. What type of conflict is it?
a. Dysfunctional conflict
*b. Interpersonal conflict
c. Intergroup conflict
d. Intrapersonal conflict
e. Conflict between individual and group
660. A pharmacist approached the chief manager of the pharmacy with a request for pay raise. The chief manager turned down this request. What type of conflict is it?
a. Intergroup conflict
b. Intrapersonal conflict
c. Dysfunctional conflict
*d. Interpersonal conflict
e. Conflict between individual and group
661. A pharmacist approached the chief manager of the pharmacy with a request for pay raise. The chief manager turned down this request. What type of conflict is it?
a. Intrapersonal conflict
b. Conflict between individual and group
c. Intergroup conflict
d. Dysfunctional conflict
*e. Interpersonal conflict
662. A pharmacist at the analytical quality control laboratory uses acidimetry in a non-aqueous medium to study a verapamil hydrochloride substance. What solution would the pharmacist use as a titrant in this study?
a. Sodium edetate solution
*b. Perchloric acid solution
c. Potassium bromate solution
d. Sodium nitrite solution
e. Zinc sulfate solution
663. A pharmacist at the analytical quality control laboratory uses acidimetry in a non-aqueous medium to study a verapamil hydrochloride substance. What solution would the pharmacist use as a titrant in this study?
a. Sodium nitrite solution
b. Potassium bromate solution
*c. Perchloric acid solution
d. Zinc sulfate solution
e. Sodium edetate solution
664. A pharmacist at the analytical quality control laboratory uses acidimetry in a non-aqueous medium to study a verapamil hydrochloride substance. What solution would the pharmacist use as a titrant in this study?
a. Zinc sulfate solution
b. Potassium bromate solution
*c. Perchloric acid solution
d. Sodium edetate solution
e. Sodium nitrite solution
665. A pharmacist at the extemporaneous compounding department of a pharmacy has prepared 100 mL of an infusion of Leonurus grass. What amount of the herbal raw material and purified water is necessary to prepare this infusion, if water absorption coefficient is 2.0?
*a. 10.0 g and 120 mL
b. 5.0 g and 110 mL
c. 20.0 g and 140 mL
d. 0.25 g and 100 mL
e. 10.0 g and 100 mL
666. A pharmacist at the extemporaneous compounding department of a pharmacy has prepared 100 mL of an infusion of Leonurus grass. What amount of the herbal raw material and purified water is necessary to prepare this infusion, if water absorption coefficient is 2.0?
*a. 10.0 g and 120 mL
b. 5.0 g and 110 mL
c. 20.0 g and 140 mL
d. 10.0 g and 100 mL
e. 0.25 g and 100 mL
667. A pharmacist at the extemporaneous compounding department of a pharmacy has prepared 100 mL of an infusion of Leonurus grass. What amount of the herbal raw material and purified water is necessary to prepare this infusion, if water absorption coefficient is 2.0?
a. 20.0 g and 140 mL
b. 0.25 g and 100 mL
c. 5.0 g and 110 mL
d. 10.0 g and 100 mL
*e. 10.0 g and 120 mL
668. A pharmacist at the extemporaneous compounding department of a pharmacy has received a prescription for an infusion marked "Сito". How long such an aqueous extract must be infused in a water bath?
a. 10 minutes
b. 45 minutes
c. 15 minutes
d. 30 minutes
*e. 25 minutes
669. A pharmacist at the extemporaneous compounding department of a pharmacy has received a prescription for an infusion marked "Сito". How long such an aqueous extract must be infused in a water bath?
a. 15 minutes
b. 10 minutes
c. 45 minutes
d. 30 minutes
*e. 25 minutes
670. A pharmacist at the extemporaneous compounding department of a pharmacy has received a prescription for an infusion marked "Сito". How long such an aqueous extract must be infused in a water bath?
a. 30 minutes
b. 10 minutes
c. 45 minutes
d. 15 minutes
*e. 25 minutes
671. A pharmacist at the pharmacy has received a promotion. What type of job rotation is it?
a. -
b. Mixed
c. Combined
*d. Vertical
e. Horizontal
672. A pharmacist at the pharmacy has received a promotion. What type of job rotation is it?
a. Horizontal
*b. Vertical
c. Mixed
d. -
e. Combined
673. A pharmacist at the pharmacy has received a promotion. What type of job rotation is it?
a. Mixed
*b. Vertical
c. Combined
d. -
e. Horizontal
674. A pharmacist has a labour dispute with the pharmacy administration about rescheduling his annual vacation leave. The employee can appeal against the decision of the pharmacy administration to the following body:
a. The Ministry of Public Health of Ukraine
*b. Labour disputes committee (LDC)
c. Highest management bodies of pharmaceutical service at the regional level
d. Trade union committee
e. Commercial court
675. A pharmacist has a labour dispute with the pharmacy administration about rescheduling his annual vacation leave. The employee can appeal against the decision of the pharmacy administration to the following body:
a. The Ministry of Public Health of Ukraine
*b. Labour disputes committee (LDC)
c. Trade union committee
d. Highest management bodies of pharmaceutical service at the regional level
e. Commercial court
676. A pharmacist has a labour dispute with the pharmacy administration about rescheduling his annual vacation leave. The employee can appeal against the decision of the pharmacy administration to the following body:
a. Trade union committee
b. Commercial court
c. Highest management bodies of pharmaceutical service at the regional level
*d. Labour disputes committee (LDC)
e. The Ministry of Public Health of Ukraine
677. A pharmacist has made a topical solution with lipophilic vehicle. Specify the substance that produces such a type of solution:
*a. Menthol
b. Starch
c. Sulfur
d. Dermatol (bismuth subgallate)
e. Novocaine hydrochloride
678. A pharmacist has made a topical solution with lipophilic vehicle. Specify the substance that produces such a type of solution:
a. Starch
*b. Menthol
c. Dermatol (bismuth subgallate)
d. Novocaine hydrochloride
e. Sulfur
679. A pharmacist has made an injection solution that contains a salt produced by reaction of a strong base with a weak acid. Specify the necessary stabilizer:
*a. Sodium hydrochloride
b. Ascorbic acid
c. Sodium sulfate
d. Hydrochloric acid
e. Cysteine
680. A pharmacist has made an injection solution that contains a salt produced by reaction of a strong base with a weak acid. Specify the necessary stabilizer:
a. Ascorbic acid
b. Hydrochloric acid
c. Sodium sulfate
d. Cysteine
*e. Sodium hydrochloride
681. A pharmacist has made an injection solution that contains a salt produced by reaction of a strong base with a weak acid. Specify the necessary stabilizer:
a. Hydrochloric acid
b. Ascorbic acid
c. Cysteine
*d. Sodium hydrochloride
e. Sodium sulfate
682. A pharmacist has prepared a Leonurus tincture with sodium bromide. How was sodium bromide introduced into the preparation in this case?
a. Concentrated solution was added into the prepared extract
b. Sodium bromide was dissolved in the tincture in a vial for dispensing
*c. Dry substance was dissolved in the filtered extract in a stand
d. Dry substance was dissolved in the infusion apparatus
e. Sodium bromide was mixed in a separate vessel with a part of the extract, than this mixture was added into the prepared tincture
683. A pharmacist has prepared a Leonurus tincture with sodium bromide. How was sodium bromide introduced into the preparation in this case?
a. Dry substance was dissolved in the infusion apparatus
b. Concentrated solution was added into the prepared extract
c. Sodium bromide was dissolved in the tincture in a vial for dispensing
*d. Dry substance was dissolved in the filtered extract in a stand
e. Sodium bromide was mixed in a separate vessel with a part of the extract, than this mixture was added into the prepared tincture
684. A pharmacist has prepared a Leonurus tincture with sodium bromide. How was sodium bromide introduced into the preparation in this case?
a. Dry substance was dissolved in the infusion apparatus
b. Sodium bromide was dissolved in the tincture in a vial for dispensing
c. Sodium bromide was mixed in a separate vessel with a part of the extract, than this mixture was added into the prepared tincture
d. Concentrated solution was added into the prepared extract
*e. Dry substance was dissolved in the filtered extract in a stand
685. A pharmacist has prepared a collargol solution. Name the type of disperse system in this case:
a. Emulsion
b. True solution
c. Suspension
*d. Colloid solution
e. Aerosol
686. A pharmacist has prepared a collargol solution. Name the type of disperse system in this case:
a. Suspension
b. Emulsion
c. True solution
*d. Colloid solution
e. Aerosol
687. A pharmacist has prepared a collargol solution. Name the type of disperse system in this case:
a. True solution
b. Aerosol
*c. Colloid solution
d. Suspension
e. Emulsion
688. A pharmacist has prepared a compound ointment. What is the correct sequence of its preparation?
*a. Suspension - solution - emulsion
b. Emulsion - suspension - solution
c. Solution - suspension - emulsion
d. Emulsion - solution - suspension
e. Solution - emulsion - suspension
689. A pharmacist has prepared a compound ointment. What is the correct sequence of its preparation?
a. Emulsion - solution - suspension
b. Emulsion - suspension - solution
*c. Suspension - solution - emulsion
d. Solution - emulsion - suspension
e. Solution - suspension - emulsion
690. A pharmacist has prepared a compound ointment. What is the correct sequence of its preparation?
a. Emulsion - solution - suspension
b. Solution - emulsion - suspension
*c. Suspension - solution - emulsion
d. Solution - suspension - emulsion
e. Emulsion - suspension - solution
691. A pharmacist has prepared a liquid mixture. What component was added last into the vial?
a. 20% sodium bromide solution
*b. Tincture of valerian
c. Simple syrup
d. Potassium bromide
e. Purified water
692. A pharmacist has prepared a liquid mixture. What component was added last into the vial?
a. 20% sodium bromide solution
*b. Tincture of valerian
c. Simple syrup
d. Purified water
e. Potassium bromide
693. A pharmacist has prepared a liquid mixture. What component was added last into the vial?
a. Simple syrup
b. Purified water
*c. Tincture of valerian
d. 20% sodium bromide solution
e. Potassium bromide
694. A pharmacist has prepared a medicine by dissolving the active substances in the water that was acidified with hydrochloric acid solution (1:10). Such preparation technology is characteristic of:
a. Collargol (Colloidal silver)
b. Osarsol
*c. Pepsin
d. Copper sulfate
e. Tannin
695. A pharmacist has prepared a medicine by dissolving the active substances in the water that was acidified with hydrochloric acid solution (1:10). Such preparation technology is characteristic of:
a. Osarsol
b. Collargol (Colloidal silver)
*c. Pepsin
d. Tannin
e. Copper sulfate
696. A pharmacist has prepared a medicine by dissolving the active substances in the water that was acidified with hydrochloric acid solution (1:10). Such preparation technology is characteristic of:
a. Osarsol
b. Collargol (Colloidal silver)
c. Copper sulfate
*d. Pepsin
e. Tannin
697. A pharmacist has prepared a medicine, using the following formulation: Magnesii oxydi Natrii hydrocarbonatis ana 0.2 M. f. pulv. D. t. d. №12 S. Take one powder thrice a day. endtabular What is the optimal preparation technique in this case?
a. Comminute magnesium oxide with alcohol, add sodium bicarbonate, mix the ingredients
*b. Comminute sodium bicarbonate, add magnesium oxide, mix the ingredients
c. Comminute magnesium oxide, add sodium bicarbonate, mix the ingredients
d. Comminute a part of magnesium oxide, add sodium bicarbonate, add the remaining magnesium oxide, mix the ingredients
e. Comminute sodium bicarbonate with alcohol, add magnesium oxide, mix the ingredients
698. A pharmacist has prepared a medicine, using the following formulation: Magnesii oxydi Natrii hydrocarbonatis ana 0.2 M. f. pulv. D. t. d. №12 S. Take one powder thrice a day. endtabular What is the optimal preparation technique in this case?
a. Comminute magnesium oxide with alcohol, add sodium bicarbonate, mix the ingredients
b. Comminute a part of magnesium oxide, add sodium bicarbonate, add the remaining magnesium oxide, mix the ingredients
*c. Comminute sodium bicarbonate, add magnesium oxide, mix the ingredients
d. Comminute sodium bicarbonate with alcohol, add magnesium oxide, mix the ingredients
e. Comminute magnesium oxide, add sodium bicarbonate, mix the ingredients
699. A pharmacist has prepared a medicine, using the following formulation: Magnesii oxydi Natrii hydrocarbonatis ana 0.2 M. f. pulv. D. t. d. №12 S. Take one powder thrice a day. endtabular What is the optimal preparation technique in this case?
a. Comminute sodium bicarbonate with alcohol, add magnesium oxide, mix the ingredients
b. Comminute magnesium oxide, add sodium bicarbonate, mix the ingredients
*c. Comminute sodium bicarbonate, add magnesium oxide, mix the ingredients
d. Comminute a part of magnesium oxide, add sodium bicarbonate, add the remaining magnesium oxide, mix the ingredients
e. Comminute magnesium oxide with alcohol, add sodium bicarbonate, mix the ingredients
700. A pharmacist has prepared a solid dosage form - a compound powder. What technological operation is textbfNOT a part of preparation process in this case?
*a. Dissolution
b. Mixing
c. Dosing
d. Packing
e. Comminution
701. A pharmacist has prepared a solid dosage form - a compound powder. What technological operation is textbfNOT a part of preparation process in this case?
*a. Dissolution
b. Packing
c. Comminution
d. Dosing
e. Mixing
702. A pharmacist has prepared a solid dosage form - a compound powder. What technological operation is textbfNOT a part of preparation process in this case?
a. Packing
b. Dosing
c. Comminution
*d. Dissolution
e. Mixing
703. A pharmacist has prepared a suspension that contains basic bismuth nitrate. What method was used in the process of its preparation?
*a. Dispersion with stirring
b. Chemical condensation
c. Solvent replacement method
d. Continental method
e. Physical condensation
704. A pharmacist has prepared a suspension that contains basic bismuth nitrate. What method was used in the process of its preparation?
a. Continental method
b. Chemical condensation
*c. Dispersion with stirring
d. Solvent replacement method
e. Physical condensation
705. A pharmacist has prepared a suspension that contains basic bismuth nitrate. What method was used in the process of its preparation?
a. Continental method
b. Physical condensation
c. Solvent replacement method
d. Chemical condensation
*e. Dispersion with stirring
706. A pharmacist has prepared a tincture from Adonis vernalis grass. What special technique was necessary in this case to extract the active substances?
*a. They must be extracted in a neutral medium
b. They must be extracted in a slightly alkaline medium
c. They must be extracted in an acidic medium
d. They must be extracted in a weakly acidic medium
e. They must be extracted in an alkaline medium
707. A pharmacist has prepared a tincture from Adonis vernalis grass. What special technique was necessary in this case to extract the active substances?
a. They must be extracted in an alkaline medium
*b. They must be extracted in a neutral medium
c. They must be extracted in a slightly alkaline medium
d. They must be extracted in an acidic medium
e. They must be extracted in a weakly acidic medium
708. A pharmacist has prepared a tincture from Adonis vernalis grass. What special technique was necessary in this case to extract the active substances?
a. They must be extracted in an alkaline medium
*b. They must be extracted in a neutral medium
c. They must be extracted in a weakly acidic medium
d. They must be extracted in a slightly alkaline medium
e. They must be extracted in an acidic medium
709. A pharmacist has prepared an aqueous extract using the cold infusion method. What herbal raw material was it?
a. Arctostaphylos leaves
b. Buckthorn bark
*c. Marshmallow roots
d. Mint leaves
e. Thermopsis grass
710. A pharmacist has prepared an aqueous extract using the cold infusion method. What herbal raw material was it?
a. Thermopsis grass
*b. Marshmallow roots
c. Arctostaphylos leaves
d. Buckthorn bark
e. Mint leaves
711. A pharmacist has prepared an aqueous extract using the cold infusion method. What herbal raw material was it?
a. Thermopsis grass
b. Mint leaves
c. Buckthorn bark
*d. Marshmallow roots
e. Arctostaphylos leaves
712. A pharmacist has prepared an ascorbic acid solution for injections. What stabilizer was used in this case?
*a. Sodium sulfite
b. 0.1 M solution of hydrochloric acid
c. Boric acid
d. 0.1 M solution of sodium hydroxide
e. Weibel stabilizer
713. A pharmacist has prepared an ascorbic acid solution for injections. What stabilizer was used in this case?
a. Boric acid
b. 0.1 M solution of hydrochloric acid
c. Weibel stabilizer
d. 0.1 M solution of sodium hydroxide
*e. Sodium sulfite
714. A pharmacist has prepared an ascorbic acid solution for injections. What stabilizer was used in this case?
a. Boric acid
b. 0.1 M solution of sodium hydroxide
c. Weibel stabilizer
d. 0.1 M solution of hydrochloric acid
*e. Sodium sulfite
715. A pharmacist has prepared an eyedrops vehicle. What method of sterilization should be chosen in this case?
*a. Dry heat
b. Pasteurization
c. Ultraviolet irradiation
d. Membrane filtration
e. Flowing steam
716. A pharmacist has prepared an eyedrops vehicle. What method of sterilization should be chosen in this case?
a. Flowing steam
b. Pasteurization
c. Ultraviolet irradiation
d. Membrane filtration
*e. Dry heat
717. A pharmacist has prepared an eyedrops vehicle. What method of sterilization should be chosen in this case?
a. Ultraviolet irradiation
b. Membrane filtration
c. Flowing steam
d. Pasteurization
*e. Dry heat
718. A pharmacist has prepared an injection solution of ascorbic acid. What substance is necessary for solution stabilization in this case?
a. Sodium acetate
b. Sodium chloride
*c. Sodium sulfite
d. Sodium citrate
e. Sodium bromide
719. A pharmacist has prepared an injection solution of ascorbic acid. What substance is necessary for solution stabilization in this case?
a. Sodium bromide
*b. Sodium sulfite
c. Sodium chloride
d. Sodium acetate
e. Sodium citrate
720. A pharmacist has prepared an injection solution of ascorbic acid. What substance is necessary for solution stabilization in this case?
a. Sodium bromide
*b. Sodium sulfite
c. Sodium citrate
d. Sodium acetate
e. Sodium chloride
721. A pharmacist has prepared an oak bark decoction. What is the ratio of the herbal raw material to extractant?
a. 1:30
*b. 1:10
c. 1:400
d. 1:20
e. 1:5
722. A pharmacist has prepared an oak bark decoction. What is the ratio of the herbal raw material to extractant?
a. 1:30
b. 1:400
c. 1:5
*d. 1:10
e. 1:20
723. A pharmacist has prepared an oak bark decoction. What is the ratio of the herbal raw material to extractant?
a. 1:5
b. 1:30
c. 1:400
d. 1:20
*e. 1:10
724. A pharmacist has prepared suppositories with novocaine (procaine) hydrochloride using a rolling technique. The novocaine hydrochloride content is less than 5%. How is this substance introduced into the base in this case?
*a. Dissolution in the minimal amount of water
b. Dissolution in ethyl alcohol
c. Dissolution in the melted base
d. Dissolution in the minimal amount of castor oil
e. Dissolution in the minimal amount of alcohol-water-glycerin mixture
725. A pharmacist has prepared suppositories with novocaine (procaine) hydrochloride using a rolling technique. The novocaine hydrochloride content is less than 5%. How is this substance introduced into the base in this case?
*a. Dissolution in the minimal amount of water
b. Dissolution in the minimal amount of alcohol-water-glycerin mixture
c. Dissolution in the minimal amount of castor oil
d. Dissolution in ethyl alcohol
e. Dissolution in the melted base
726. A pharmacist has prepared suppositories with novocaine (procaine) hydrochloride using a rolling technique. The novocaine hydrochloride content is less than 5%. How is this substance introduced into the base in this case?
a. Dissolution in the minimal amount of alcohol-water-glycerin mixture
b. Dissolution in ethyl alcohol
c. Dissolution in the melted base
d. Dissolution in the minimal amount of castor oil
*e. Dissolution in the minimal amount of water
727. A pharmacist has remained working long after the working day was officially over. How is this work period called?
*a. Overtime
b. Dayshift
c. Extended time
d. Nightshift
e. Regular hours
728. A pharmacist has remained working long after the working day was officially over. How is this work period called?
a. Nightshift
*b. Overtime
c. Regular hours
d. Dayshift
e. Extended time
729. A pharmacist has remained working long after the working day was officially over. How is this work period called?
a. Regular hours
b. Extended time
c. Dayshift
d. Nightshift
*e. Overtime
730. A pharmacist needs to add a stabilizer to prepare an atropine sulfate solution for injections. What stabilizer would the pharmacist choose for this purpose?
a. Ascorbic acid
b. Sodium metabisulfite
c. Sodium bicarbonate
*d. Hydrochloric acid
e. Sodium hydroxide
731. A pharmacist needs to add a stabilizer to prepare an atropine sulfate solution for injections. What stabilizer would the pharmacist choose for this purpose?
a. Sodium hydroxide
b. Ascorbic acid
c. Sodium metabisulfite
*d. Hydrochloric acid
e. Sodium bicarbonate
732. A pharmacist needs to add a stabilizer to prepare an atropine sulfate solution for injections. What stabilizer would the pharmacist choose for this purpose?
a. Sodium hydroxide
b. Sodium bicarbonate
*c. Hydrochloric acid
d. Ascorbic acid
e. Sodium metabisulfite
733. A pharmacist needs to make a 5% sodium bicarbonate solution for injections. What is the optimum temperature for sodium bicarbonate dissolution that allows avoiding its forceful stirring?
*a. 15-20^oC
b. 25-35^oC
c. 30-45^oC
d. 80-100^oC
e. 45-55^oC
734. A pharmacist needs to make a 5% sodium bicarbonate solution for injections. What is the optimum temperature for sodium bicarbonate dissolution that allows avoiding its forceful stirring?
a. 30-45^oC
b. 25-35^oC
c. 80-100^oC
*d. 15-20^oC
e. 45-55^oC
735. A pharmacist needs to make a 5% sodium bicarbonate solution for injections. What is the optimum temperature for sodium bicarbonate dissolution that allows avoiding its forceful stirring?
a. 45-55^oC
b. 25-35^oC
*c. 15-20^oC
d. 30-45^oC
e. 80-100^oC
736. A pharmacist needs to prepare a trituration of platyphylline hydrotartrate (1:10). What filler would be optimal for making this trituration?
a. Corn starch
b. Refined sugar
*c. Lactose
d. Rice starch
e. Mannitol
737. A pharmacist needs to prepare a trituration of platyphylline hydrotartrate (1:10). What filler would be optimal for making this trituration?
a. Corn starch
b. Refined sugar
c. Rice starch
d. Mannitol
*e. Lactose
738. A pharmacist needs to prepare a trituration of platyphylline hydrotartrate (1:10). What filler would be optimal for making this trituration?
a. Rice starch
*b. Lactose
c. Mannitol
d. Refined sugar
e. Corn starch
739. A pharmacist needs to prepare eyedrops with pilocarpine hydrochloride. Specify the optimal isotonic agent in this case:
a. Boric acid
b. Sodium nitrite
c. Sodium sulfate
d. Glucose
*e. Sodium chloride
740. A pharmacist needs to prepare eyedrops with pilocarpine hydrochloride. Specify the optimal isotonic agent in this case:
a. Glucose
*b. Sodium chloride
c. Boric acid
d. Sodium sulfate
e. Sodium nitrite
741. A pharmacist needs to prepare eyedrops with pilocarpine hydrochloride. Specify the optimal isotonic agent in this case:
a. Glucose
b. Sodium sulfate
c. Boric acid
d. Sodium nitrite
*e. Sodium chloride
742. A pharmacist needs to weigh out a medicinal substance from the general list  -  glucose. What minimum amount of glucose can be weighed out using one-gram hand scales?
*a. 0.02 g
b. 0.03 g
c. 0.04 g
d. 0.01 g
e. 0.05 g
743. A pharmacist needs to weigh out a medicinal substance from the general list  -  glucose. What minimum amount of glucose can be weighed out using one-gram hand scales?
*a. 0.02 g
b. 0.05 g
c. 0.04 g
d. 0.01 g
e. 0.03 g
744. A pharmacist needs to weigh out a medicinal substance from the general list  -  glucose. What minimum amount of glucose can be weighed out using one-gram hand scales?
a. 0.04 g
*b. 0.02 g
c. 0.03 g
d. 0.05 g
e. 0.01 g
745. A pharmacist prepared a 5% glucose solution and added 5 mL of Weibel's stabilizer. What is the volume of the prepared solution?
*a. 100 mL
b. 50 mL
c. 500 mL
d. 1000 mL
e. 300 mL
746. A pharmacist prepared a 5% glucose solution and added 5 mL of Weibel's stabilizer. What is the volume of the prepared solution?
a. 50 mL
b. 1000 mL
c. 300 mL
d. 500 mL
*e. 100 mL
747. A pharmacist prepared a 5% glucose solution and added 5 mL of Weibel's stabilizer. What is the volume of the prepared solution?
a. 50 mL
b. 1000 mL
c. 500 mL
*d. 100 mL
e. 300 mL
748. A pharmacist prepares 100 ml of glucose solution. Specify the amount of Weibel's stabilizer necessary in this case:
a. 10 ml
b. 2 ml
c. 15 ml
*d. 5 ml
e. 20 ml
749. A pharmacist prepares 100 ml of glucose solution. Specify the amount of Weibel's stabilizer necessary in this case:
a. 15 ml
b. 20 ml
c. 10 ml
d. 2 ml
*e. 5 ml
750. A pharmacist prepares 100 ml of glucose solution. Specify the amount of Weibel's stabilizer necessary in this case:
a. 2 ml
*b. 5 ml
c. 15 ml
d. 20 ml
e. 10 ml
751. A pharmacist prepares 180 ml of adonis grass infusion. How much herbal raw material should be taken to prepare this infusion?
*a. 6.0
b. 18.0
c. 10.0
d. 15.0
e. 2.0
752. A pharmacist prepares 180 ml of adonis grass infusion. How much herbal raw material should be taken to prepare this infusion?
*a. 6.0
b. 2.0
c. 15.0
d. 18.0
e. 10.0
753. A pharmacist prepares 180 ml of adonis grass infusion. How much herbal raw material should be taken to prepare this infusion?
a. 15.0
b. 18.0
*c. 6.0
d. 2.0
e. 10.0
754. A pharmacist prepares a chamomile flowers infusion. Specify the proportion of raw material to infusion:
*a. 1:10
b. 1:30
c. 1:400
d. 1:50
e. 1:20
755. A pharmacist prepares a chamomile flowers infusion. Specify the proportion of raw material to infusion:
a. 1:30
*b. 1:10
c. 1:400
d. 1:50
e. 1:20
756. A pharmacist prepares a chamomile flowers infusion. Specify the proportion of raw material to infusion:
a. 1:50
b. 1:400
c. 1:20
d. 1:30
*e. 1:10
757. A pharmacist prepares a compound powder. What medicinal substance must be comminuted without adding an adjuvant liquid (alcohol or ether)?
a. Camphor
b. Streptocide (Sulfanilamide)
c. Menthol
d. Thymol
*e. Zinc oxide
758. A pharmacist prepares a compound powder. What medicinal substance must be comminuted without adding an adjuvant liquid (alcohol or ether)?
a. Thymol
b. Menthol
*c. Zinc oxide
d. Streptocide (Sulfanilamide)
e. Camphor
759. A pharmacist prepares a compound powder. What medicinal substance must be comminuted without adding an adjuvant liquid (alcohol or ether)?
a. Thymol
b. Streptocide (Sulfanilamide)
*c. Zinc oxide
d. Camphor
e. Menthol
760. A pharmacist prepares a mixture that according to the prescription must contain ammonia spirit-anise spirit drops. What type of a disperse system will form as a result?
*a. Opalescent mixture
b. Emulsion
c. True solution
d. High-molecular compound solution
e. Colloidal solution
761. A pharmacist prepares a mixture that according to the prescription must contain ammonia spirit-anise spirit drops. What type of a disperse system will form as a result?
a. Emulsion
*b. Opalescent mixture
c. True solution
d. High-molecular compound solution
e. Colloidal solution
762. A pharmacist prepares a mixture that according to the prescription must contain ammonia spirit-anise spirit drops. What type of a disperse system will form as a result?
a. True solution
b. Emulsion
c. Colloidal solution
d. High-molecular compound solution
*e. Opalescent mixture
763. A pharmacist prepares a suspension with a hydrophobic substance. What stabilizer is necessary for this dispersion system?
*a. Methyl cellulose
b. Boric acid
c. Glucose
d. Nipagin (Methylparaben)
e. Sodium chloride
764. A pharmacist prepares a suspension with a hydrophobic substance. What stabilizer is necessary for this dispersion system?
a. Sodium chloride
*b. Methyl cellulose
c. Boric acid
d. Glucose
e. Nipagin (Methylparaben)
765. A pharmacist prepares a suspension with a hydrophobic substance. What stabilizer is necessary for this dispersion system?
a. Sodium chloride
b. Glucose
*c. Methyl cellulose
d. Boric acid
e. Nipagin (Methylparaben)
766. A pharmacist prepares a vaseline-based ointment. The vehicle was heated to 40^oC) What substance was introduced into the heated vehicle?
*a. Camphor
b. Vinilin (polyvinyl butyl ether)
c. Benzoic acid
d. Streptocide
e. Anesthesin
767. A pharmacist prepares a vaseline-based ointment. The vehicle was heated to 40^oC) What substance was introduced into the heated vehicle?
a. Anesthesin
b. Benzoic acid
*c. Camphor
d. Streptocide
e. Vinilin (polyvinyl butyl ether)
768. A pharmacist prepares a vaseline-based ointment. The vehicle was heated to 40^oC) What substance was introduced into the heated vehicle?
a. Anesthesin
b. Vinilin (polyvinyl butyl ether)
c. Streptocide
d. Benzoic acid
*e. Camphor
769. A pharmacist prepares an infusion in proportion 1:400. Specify the herbal raw material used in this infusion:
a. Camomile grass
b. Althaea roots
c. Oak bark
d. Motherwort grass
*e. Thermopsis grass
770. A pharmacist prepares an infusion in proportion 1:400. Specify the herbal raw material used in this infusion:
a. Oak bark
b. Althaea roots
c. Camomile grass
*d. Thermopsis grass
e. Motherwort grass
771. A pharmacist prepares an infusion in proportion 1:400. Specify the herbal raw material used in this infusion:
a. Oak bark
b. Camomile grass
c. Althaea roots
d. Motherwort grass
*e. Thermopsis grass
772. A pharmacist prepares an injection solution that must be stabilized with 0,1M of hydrochloric acid solution. What solution is to be prepared?
*a. Novocaine
b. Potassium chloride
c. Hexamethylenetetramine
d. Sodium benzoate
e. Calcium chloride
773. A pharmacist prepares an injection solution that must be stabilized with 0,1M of hydrochloric acid solution. What solution is to be prepared?
a. Potassium chloride
b. Calcium chloride
*c. Novocaine
d. Hexamethylenetetramine
e. Sodium benzoate
774. A pharmacist prepares an injection solution that must be stabilized with 0,1M of hydrochloric acid solution. What solution is to be prepared?
a. Sodium benzoate
*b. Novocaine
c. Calcium chloride
d. Potassium chloride
e. Hexamethylenetetramine
775. A pharmacist prepares an oil emulsion with menthol. How should menthol be introduced in this case?
*a. Menthol should be dissolved in oil
b. Menthol should be introduced as a suspension into the prepared emulsion
c. Menthol should be dissolved in the purified water
d. Menthol should be comminuted with the emulsifier
e. Menthol should be comminuted in a mortar with ethanol
776. A pharmacist prepares an oil emulsion with menthol. How should menthol be introduced in this case?
a. Menthol should be comminuted with the emulsifier
b. Menthol should be comminuted in a mortar with ethanol
*c. Menthol should be dissolved in oil
d. Menthol should be dissolved in the purified water
e. Menthol should be introduced as a suspension into the prepared emulsion
777. A pharmacist prepares an oil emulsion with menthol. How should menthol be introduced in this case?
a. Menthol should be introduced as a suspension into the prepared emulsion
b. Menthol should be comminuted with the emulsifier
c. Menthol should be dissolved in the purified water
*d. Menthol should be dissolved in oil
e. Menthol should be comminuted in a mortar with ethanol
778. A pharmacist prepares cocoa butter-based round vaginal suppositories with less than 5% of citric acid. Specify the most rational approach to introduction of the active ingredient into the vehicle:
*a. Dissolve in minimal quantity of purified water
b. Dissolve in alcohol
c. Dissolve in vaseline oil
d. Dissolve in Dimexid (Dimethylsulfoxide)
e. Dissolve in molten cocoa butter
779. A pharmacist prepares cocoa butter-based round vaginal suppositories with less than 5% of citric acid. Specify the most rational approach to introduction of the active ingredient into the vehicle:
*a. Dissolve in minimal quantity of purified water
b. Dissolve in vaseline oil
c. Dissolve in alcohol
d. Dissolve in molten cocoa butter
e. Dissolve in Dimexid (Dimethylsulfoxide)
780. A pharmacist prepares cocoa butter-based round vaginal suppositories with less than 5% of citric acid. Specify the most rational approach to introduction of the active ingredient into the vehicle:
a. Dissolve in molten cocoa butter
*b. Dissolve in minimal quantity of purified water
c. Dissolve in alcohol
d. Dissolve in vaseline oil
e. Dissolve in Dimexid (Dimethylsulfoxide)
781. A pharmacist prepares fat-based suppositories by pouring. Specify the type of fatty vehicle in this case:
*a. Butyrol
b. Cocoa butter
c. Wax
d. Spermaceti
e. Vaseline (petroleum jelly)
782. A pharmacist prepares fat-based suppositories by pouring. Specify the type of fatty vehicle in this case:
*a. Butyrol
b. Spermaceti
c. Cocoa butter
d. Wax
e. Vaseline (petroleum jelly)
783. A pharmacist prepares fat-based suppositories by pouring. Specify the type of fatty vehicle in this case:
*a. Butyrol
b. Vaseline (petroleum jelly)
c. Spermaceti
d. Wax
e. Cocoa butter
784. A pharmacist prepares powders with riboflavin. How should riboflavin be introduced into the powder mixture?
a. Mix the components in the descending order based on their amount
b. Riboflavin powder should be sifted in advance
c. Mix the components in the ascending order based on their amount
d. Riboflavin should be added on the top of the prepared mixture of other ingredients
*e. ''Three layers'' method
785. A pharmacist prepares powders with riboflavin. How should riboflavin be introduced into the powder mixture?
a. Mix the components in the descending order based on their amount
b. Riboflavin should be added on the top of the prepared mixture of other ingredients
c. Riboflavin powder should be sifted in advance
*d. ''Three layers'' method
e. Mix the components in the ascending order based on their amount
786. A pharmacist prepares powders with riboflavin. How should riboflavin be introduced into the powder mixture?
a. Riboflavin powder should be sifted in advance
b. Mix the components in the descending order based on their amount
*c. ''Three layers'' method
d. Mix the components in the ascending order based on their amount
e. Riboflavin should be added on the top of the prepared mixture of other ingredients
787. A pharmacist prepares rectal suppositories in the pharmacy. Name the acceptable range, within which the average weight of such suppositories may vary:
a. 2.0-5.0
b. 4.0-7.0
c. 5.0-8.0
*d. 1.0-4.0
e. 3.0-6.0
788. A pharmacist prepares rectal suppositories in the pharmacy. Name the acceptable range, within which the average weight of such suppositories may vary:
a. 3.0-6.0
b. 5.0-8.0
c. 2.0-5.0
*d. 1.0-4.0
e. 4.0-7.0
789. A pharmacist prepares suppositories by pouring. Name the coefficient for substitution of fatty vehicle with glycerinated gelatin vehicle:
a. 1.20
b. 1.11
c. 1.25
d. 1.31
*e. 1.21
790. A pharmacist prepares suppositories by pouring. Name the coefficient for substitution of fatty vehicle with glycerinated gelatin vehicle:
a. 1.20
b. 1.25
*c. 1.21
d. 1.11
e. 1.31
791. A pharmacist prepares suppositories by pouring. Name the coefficient for substitution of fatty vehicle with glycerinated gelatin vehicle:
a. 1.31
b. 1.25
c. 1.11
*d. 1.21
e. 1.20
792. A pharmacist uses Vitepsol to prepare rectal suppositories. What fluid should be used in this case to lubricate the suppository form?
*a. Spiritus saponatus
b. Purified water
c. Peach oil
d. Ethyl alcohol
e. Vaseline oil (liquid paraffin)
793. A pharmacist uses Vitepsol to prepare rectal suppositories. What fluid should be used in this case to lubricate the suppository form?
a. Ethyl alcohol
b. Purified water
*c. Spiritus saponatus
d. Vaseline oil (liquid paraffin)
e. Peach oil
794. A pharmacist uses Vitepsol to prepare rectal suppositories. What fluid should be used in this case to lubricate the suppository form?
a. Vaseline oil (liquid paraffin)
b. Purified water
*c. Spiritus saponatus
d. Ethyl alcohol
e. Peach oil
795. A pharmacist-analyst of a control-analytical laboratory performs  identification of a drug substance in accordance with the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine regulations. What result is observed during the test for benzoates with a solution of iron(III) chloride?
*a. A pale yellow ether-soluble precipitate forms
b. A black precipitate forms, which  dissolves if a diluted sodium hydroxide solution is added
c. The solution colors blue and becomes colorless after the addition of ammonia solution
d. A white precipitate forms, which is  insoluble in a diluted hydrochloric acid
e. An intense blue coloring appears
796. A pharmacist-analyst of a control-analytical laboratory performs  identification of a drug substance in accordance with the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine regulations. What result is observed during the test for benzoates with a solution of iron(III) chloride?
a. The solution colors blue and becomes colorless after the addition of ammonia solution
b. A black precipitate forms, which  dissolves if a diluted sodium hydroxide solution is added
c. An intense blue coloring appears
d. A white precipitate forms, which is  insoluble in a diluted hydrochloric acid
*e. A pale yellow ether-soluble precipitate forms
797. A pharmacist-analyst of a control-analytical laboratory performs  identification of a drug substance in accordance with the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine regulations. What result is observed during the test for benzoates with a solution of iron(III) chloride?
a. The solution colors blue and becomes colorless after the addition of ammonia solution
b. A white precipitate forms, which is  insoluble in a diluted hydrochloric acid
c. A black precipitate forms, which  dissolves if a diluted sodium hydroxide solution is added
*d. A pale yellow ether-soluble precipitate forms
e. An intense blue coloring appears
798. A pharmacy customer complains of constricting retrosternal pain that irradiates into the left arm; he fears that he may die. The pain appeared suddenly after physical exertion. Name the first aid medicine in this case:
a. Metacycline
b. Riboxin (Inosine)
*c. Nitroglycerine
d. Naphthyzin (Naphazoline)
e. Panangin
799. A pharmacy customer complains of constricting retrosternal pain that irradiates into the left arm; he fears that he may die. The pain appeared suddenly after physical exertion. Name the first aid medicine in this case:
a. Naphthyzin (Naphazoline)
b. Metacycline
*c. Nitroglycerine
d. Panangin
e. Riboxin (Inosine)
800. A pharmacy customer complains of constricting retrosternal pain that irradiates into the left arm; he fears that he may die. The pain appeared suddenly after physical exertion. Name the first aid medicine in this case:
a. Riboxin (Inosine)
b. Naphthyzin (Naphazoline)
c. Panangin
d. Metacycline
*e. Nitroglycerine
801. A pharmacy customer complains of constricting, sometimes burning pain behind the sternum, with irradiation to the neck and left arm. The pain lasts for 5-10 minutes. What drug should be given to this customer for emergency aid?
*a. Nitroglycerine
b. Isosorbide dinitrate
c. Nifedipine
d. Bisoprolol
e. Digoxin
802. A pharmacy customer complains of constricting, sometimes burning pain behind the sternum, with irradiation to the neck and left arm. The pain lasts for 5-10 minutes. What drug should be given to this customer for emergency aid?
a. Bisoprolol
*b. Nitroglycerine
c. Nifedipine
d. Digoxin
e. Isosorbide dinitrate
803. A pharmacy customer complains of constricting, sometimes burning pain behind the sternum, with irradiation to the neck and left arm. The pain lasts for 5-10 minutes. What drug should be given to this customer for emergency aid?
a. Bisoprolol
b. Nifedipine
c. Digoxin
d. Isosorbide dinitrate
*e. Nitroglycerine
804. A pharmacy dispenses medical products, the cost of which must be reimbursed based on electronic prescriptions. What authority reimburses the pharmacy for the cost of dispensed drugs?
*a. National Health Service of Ukraine
b. Ministry of Labor and Social Policy of Ukraine
c. State Expert Center of the Ministry of Health of Ukraine
d. State Fiscal Service of Ukraine
e. State Service of Ukraine on Medicines and Drugs Control
805. A pharmacy dispenses medical products, the cost of which must be reimbursed based on electronic prescriptions. What authority reimburses the pharmacy for the cost of dispensed drugs?
a. Ministry of Labor and Social Policy of Ukraine
b. State Service of Ukraine on Medicines and Drugs Control
c. State Expert Center of the Ministry of Health of Ukraine
*d. National Health Service of Ukraine
e. State Fiscal Service of Ukraine
806. A pharmacy dispenses medical products, the cost of which must be reimbursed based on electronic prescriptions. What authority reimburses the pharmacy for the cost of dispensed drugs?
a. State Service of Ukraine on Medicines and Drugs Control
b. State Expert Center of the Ministry of Health of Ukraine
c. State Fiscal Service of Ukraine
*d. National Health Service of Ukraine
e. Ministry of Labor and Social Policy of Ukraine
807. A pharmacy has bought a refrigerator. What document should be filled in for such purchase?
a. An inventory list needs to be drawn up
b. No accounting documentation needs to be kept
*c. It should be assigned an inventory number and registered in the inventory cards
d. A deposit order should be filled in
e. Information should be entered into the goods report
808. A pharmacy has bought a refrigerator. What document should be filled in for such purchase?
a. Information should be entered into the goods report
b. No accounting documentation needs to be kept
c. A deposit order should be filled in
d. An inventory list needs to be drawn up
*e. It should be assigned an inventory number and registered in the inventory cards
809. A pharmacy has bought a refrigerator. What document should be filled in for such purchase?
a. No accounting documentation needs to be kept
b. An inventory list needs to be drawn up
*c. It should be assigned an inventory number and registered in the inventory cards
d. A deposit order should be filled in
e. Information should be entered into the goods report
810. A pharmacy has desided to obtain a license to make extemporaneous preparations. For this purpose it purchased a refrigerator, a cabinet dryer, and other industrial equipment. The purchased equipment belongs to the following type of assets:
*a. Fixed assets
b. Not accounted as assets
c. Package
d. Goods
e. Non-negotiable tangible assets
811. A pharmacy has desided to obtain a license to make extemporaneous preparations. For this purpose it purchased a refrigerator, a cabinet dryer, and other industrial equipment. The purchased equipment belongs to the following type of assets:
a. Non-negotiable tangible assets
*b. Fixed assets
c. Not accounted as assets
d. Goods
e. Package
812. A pharmacy has desided to obtain a license to make extemporaneous preparations. For this purpose it purchased a refrigerator, a cabinet dryer, and other industrial equipment. The purchased equipment belongs to the following type of assets:
a. Not accounted as assets
b. Goods
c. Non-negotiable tangible assets
*d. Fixed assets
e. Package
813. A pharmacy has received a batch of drugs according to the invoice. Who is authorized to conduct intake quality control when the goods arrive to the pharmacy?
*a. Employee appointed to this task by the head manager
b. Head manager
c. Tax officer
d. Officer of a local division of the state inspectorate for drug quality control
e. Pharmacist
814. A pharmacy has received a batch of drugs according to the invoice. Who is authorized to conduct intake quality control when the goods arrive to the pharmacy?
*a. Employee appointed to this task by the head manager
b. Tax officer
c. Pharmacist
d. Officer of a local division of the state inspectorate for drug quality control
e. Head manager
815. A pharmacy has received a batch of drugs according to the invoice. Who is authorized to conduct intake quality control when the goods arrive to the pharmacy?
a. Officer of a local division of the state inspectorate for drug quality control
b. Tax officer
*c. Employee appointed to this task by the head manager
d. Pharmacist
e. Head manager
816. A pharmacy has received a batch of herbal raw material - caraway fruits. What medicinal plant is cultivated for harvesting of this herbal raw material?
a. Anisum vulgare
*b. Carum carvi
c. Coriandrum sativum
d. Foeniculum vulgare
e. Anethum graveolens
817. A pharmacy has received a batch of herbal raw material - caraway fruits. What medicinal plant is cultivated for harvesting of this herbal raw material?
a. Coriandrum sativum
b. Anethum graveolens
c. Anisum vulgare
*d. Carum carvi
e. Foeniculum vulgare
818. A pharmacy has received a batch of herbal raw material - caraway fruits. What medicinal plant is cultivated for harvesting of this herbal raw material?
a. Coriandrum sativum
b. Anethum graveolens
c. Foeniculum vulgare
d. Anisum vulgare
*e. Carum carvi
819. A pharmacy has received a formulation for eye drops with protargol (silver proteinate). What substance will be used to make the eye drops isotonic?
*a. No isotonation is needed
b. Boric acid
c. Sodium sulfate
d. Sodium nitrate
e. Sodium chloride
820. A pharmacy has received a formulation for eye drops with protargol (silver proteinate). What substance will be used to make the eye drops isotonic?
a. Sodium chloride
b. Boric acid
*c. No isotonation is needed
d. Sodium nitrate
e. Sodium sulfate
821. A pharmacy has received a formulation for eye drops with protargol (silver proteinate). What substance will be used to make the eye drops isotonic?
a. Sodium sulfate
b. Sodium chloride
c. Boric acid
d. Sodium nitrate
*e. No isotonation is needed
822. A pharmacy has received a formulation for the solution with a substance that moderately expands in the cold water. Name this substance:
a. Glucose
*b. Gelatin
c. Calcium chloride
d. Sodium chloride
e. Protargol (Silver proteinate)
823. A pharmacy has received a formulation for the solution with a substance that moderately expands in the cold water. Name this substance:
a. Sodium chloride
*b. Gelatin
c. Glucose
d. Calcium chloride
e. Protargol (Silver proteinate)
824. A pharmacy has received a formulation for the solution with a substance that moderately expands in the cold water. Name this substance:
a. Sodium chloride
b. Glucose
*c. Gelatin
d. Protargol (Silver proteinate)
e. Calcium chloride
825. A pharmacy has received a prescription for colloid solution. Name this solution:
*a. Collargol solution
b. 5% glucose solution
c. Sodium chloride solution
d. Burow's solution
e. Nonaqueous solution
826. A pharmacy has received a prescription for colloid solution. Name this solution:
a. 5% glucose solution
b. Burow's solution
c. Nonaqueous solution
d. Sodium chloride solution
*e. Collargol solution
827. A pharmacy has received a prescription for colloid solution. Name this solution:
a. Burow's solution
*b. Collargol solution
c. 5% glucose solution
d. Sodium chloride solution
e. Nonaqueous solution
828. A pharmacy has received a prescription for the preparation of a solution. What substance requires the presence of sodium chloride and a hot solvent during the dissolution?
a. Sodium bromide
b. Sodium iodide
c. Streptocide (Sulfanilamide)
d. Urotropin
*e. Furacilin (Nitrofurazone)
829. A pharmacy has received a prescription for the preparation of a solution. What substance requires the presence of sodium chloride and a hot solvent during the dissolution?
a. Urotropin
b. Sodium bromide
c. Sodium iodide
d. Streptocide (Sulfanilamide)
*e. Furacilin (Nitrofurazone)
830. A pharmacy has received a prescription for the preparation of a solution. What substance requires the presence of sodium chloride and a hot solvent during the dissolution?
a. Urotropin
b. Streptocide (Sulfanilamide)
*c. Furacilin (Nitrofurazone)
d. Sodium bromide
e. Sodium iodide
831. A pharmacy has received a prescription for the preparation of powders. What substance must be added after sterilizing the powder?
*a. Streptomycin sulfate
b. Streptocide (Sulfanilamide)
c. Ephedrine hydrochloride
d. Osarsolum
e. Magnesium oxide
832. A pharmacy has received a prescription for the preparation of powders. What substance must be added after sterilizing the powder?
a. Osarsolum
b. Magnesium oxide
*c. Streptomycin sulfate
d. Streptocide (Sulfanilamide)
e. Ephedrine hydrochloride
833. A pharmacy has received a prescription for the preparation of powders. What substance must be added after sterilizing the powder?
a. Streptocide (Sulfanilamide)
b. Osarsolum
c. Magnesium oxide
d. Ephedrine hydrochloride
*e. Streptomycin sulfate
834. A pharmacy has received a prescription for tincture. What herbal raw material can be used to make this dosage form?
*a. Valerian rootstock
b. Buckthorn bark
c. Rhubarb roots
d. Oak bark
e. Arrow-wood bark
835. A pharmacy has received a prescription for tincture. What herbal raw material can be used to make this dosage form?
a. Buckthorn bark
b. Oak bark
c. Rhubarb roots
d. Arrow-wood bark
*e. Valerian rootstock
836. A pharmacy has received a prescription for tincture. What herbal raw material can be used to make this dosage form?
a. Buckthorn bark
b. Rhubarb roots
*c. Valerian rootstock
d. Arrow-wood bark
e. Oak bark
837. A pharmacy has received a prescription written on an F-3 form. The dispensing chemist, tasked with the incoming control of the prescription, noted that it was missing certain mandatory details. Such prescription forms must always have the following:
*a. Medical facility stamp, doctor's seal and signature, signature of the head manager of the medical facility, seal of the medical facility
b. Signature of the head manager of the medical facility or signature of the deputy head manager for medical work
c. Medical facility stamp, doctor's seal and signature, signature of the head manager of the medical facility
d. Medical facility stamp, signature of the head manager of the medical facility, seal of the medical facility
e. Doctor's personal seal and signature
838. A pharmacy has received a prescription written on an F-3 form. The dispensing chemist, tasked with the incoming control of the prescription, noted that it was missing certain mandatory details. Such prescription forms must always have the following:
a. Doctor's personal seal and signature
b. Medical facility stamp, signature of the head manager of the medical facility, seal of the medical facility
c. Signature of the head manager of the medical facility or signature of the deputy head manager for medical work
d. Medical facility stamp, doctor's seal and signature, signature of the head manager of the medical facility
*e. Medical facility stamp, doctor's seal and signature, signature of the head manager of the medical facility, seal of the medical facility
839. A pharmacy has received a prescription, written in an incorrect format. In this case, the dispensing chemist, tasked with the incoming control of the prescriptions, must do the following:
*a. Affix the <<Invalid prescription>> stamp to the prescription and return it to the patient
b. Give the patient a copy of the  prescription
c. Sell this medicine to the patient
d. Register the prescription in the log book and sell this medicine to the patient
e. Notify the head manager of the  pharmacy
840. A pharmacy has received a prescription, written in an incorrect format. In this case, the dispensing chemist, tasked with the incoming control of the prescriptions, must do the following:
a. Give the patient a copy of the  prescription
b. Sell this medicine to the patient
c. Notify the head manager of the  pharmacy
*d. Affix the <<Invalid prescription>> stamp to the prescription and return it to the patient
e. Register the prescription in the log book and sell this medicine to the patient
841. A pharmacy has received a prescription, written in an incorrect format. In this case, the dispensing chemist, tasked with the incoming control of the prescriptions, must do the following:
a. Notify the head manager of the  pharmacy
b. Sell this medicine to the patient
c. Give the patient a copy of the  prescription
d. Register the prescription in the log book and sell this medicine to the patient
*e. Affix the <<Invalid prescription>> stamp to the prescription and return it to the patient
842. A pharmacy has received a receipt for preparation of a dermatological ointment with a non-specified vehicle. What vehicle should be used in this case?
*a. Vaseline
b. Gelatin-glycerine gel
c. Vaseline and lanolin
d. Lanolin
e. Soap-glycerine base
843. A pharmacy has received a receipt for preparation of a dermatological ointment with a non-specified vehicle. What vehicle should be used in this case?
a. Gelatin-glycerine gel
b. Vaseline and lanolin
c. Soap-glycerine base
*d. Vaseline
e. Lanolin
844. A pharmacy has received a receipt for preparation of a dermatological ointment with a non-specified vehicle. What vehicle should be used in this case?
a. Soap-glycerine base
b. Lanolin
*c. Vaseline
d. Vaseline and lanolin
e. Gelatin-glycerine gel
845. A pharmacy has received from its supplier a shipment of drugs that are included into the National Essential Drugs List. What is the pricing policy regarding these drugs?
a. Fixed price
b. Free-of-control price
c. Indicative price
*d. Controlled price
e. Contract price
846. A pharmacy has received from its supplier a shipment of drugs that are included into the National Essential Drugs List. What is the pricing policy regarding these drugs?
a. Indicative price
b. Fixed price
*c. Controlled price
d. Contract price
e. Free-of-control price
847. A pharmacy has received from its supplier a shipment of drugs that are included into the National Essential Drugs List. What is the pricing policy regarding these drugs?
a. Indicative price
b. Fixed price
c. Contract price
d. Free-of-control price
*e. Controlled price
848. A pharmacy has received goods from a warehouse, which were delivered by the warehouse transport. Therefore, goods receipt requires the following accompanying document:
a. Specifications to the contract of delivery
*b. Motor waybill
c. Financial statement of the supplier
d. All of the listed
e. Contract of delivery
849. A pharmacy has received goods from a warehouse, which were delivered by the warehouse transport. Therefore, goods receipt requires the following accompanying document:
a. Specifications to the contract of delivery
b. All of the listed
c. Financial statement of the supplier
*d. Motor waybill
e. Contract of delivery
850. A pharmacy has received goods from a warehouse, which were delivered by the warehouse transport. Therefore, goods receipt requires the following accompanying document:
a. Specifications to the contract of delivery
b. Contract of delivery
c. Financial statement of the supplier
*d. Motor waybill
e. All of the listed
851. A pharmacy has received the following formulation: Rp.: Spiritus aethylici 20 ml Resorcini 0.2 M.D.S. Wipe the affected skin areas twice a day. endtabular What is the optimal preparation technique in this case?
a. Measure out ethyl alcohol into a vial for dispensing, measure out salicylic acid
b. Comminute the substance in a mortar, add the solvent
*c. Measure out the substance into a vial for dispensing, measure out ethyl alcohol, shake the vial
d. Measure out the solvent into a stand, measure out the substance
e. Measure out the substance into a stand, measure out the solvent
852. A pharmacy has received the following formulation: Rp.: Spiritus aethylici 20 ml Resorcini 0.2 M.D.S. Wipe the affected skin areas twice a day. endtabular What is the optimal preparation technique in this case?
a. Measure out ethyl alcohol into a vial for dispensing, measure out salicylic acid
b. Measure out the solvent into a stand, measure out the substance
c. Comminute the substance in a mortar, add the solvent
*d. Measure out the substance into a vial for dispensing, measure out ethyl alcohol, shake the vial
e. Measure out the substance into a stand, measure out the solvent
853. A pharmacy has received the following formulation: Rp.: Spiritus aethylici 20 ml Resorcini 0.2 M.D.S. Wipe the affected skin areas twice a day. endtabular What is the optimal preparation technique in this case?
a. Measure out the substance into a stand, measure out the solvent
*b. Measure out the substance into a vial for dispensing, measure out ethyl alcohol, shake the vial
c. Measure out the solvent into a stand, measure out the substance
d. Measure out ethyl alcohol into a vial for dispensing, measure out salicylic acid
e. Comminute the substance in a mortar, add the solvent
854. A pharmacy has submitted its financial report for the first quarter of 2021. It contains the following information: turnover - 92 000 UAH, cost price of the goods sold - 60 000 UAH. Therefore, the price markup for this period amounts to:
*a. 32 000 UAH
b. 90 000 UAH
c. 62 000 UAH
d. 2 000 UAH
e. 60 000 UAH
855. A pharmacy has submitted its financial report for the first quarter of 2021. It contains the following information: turnover - 92 000 UAH, cost price of the goods sold - 60 000 UAH. Therefore, the price markup for this period amounts to:
a. 62 000 UAH
b. 2 000 UAH
*c. 32 000 UAH
d. 60 000 UAH
e. 90 000 UAH
856. A pharmacy has submitted its financial report for the first quarter of 2021. It contains the following information: turnover - 92 000 UAH, cost price of the goods sold - 60 000 UAH. Therefore, the price markup for this period amounts to:
a. 90 000 UAH
*b. 32 000 UAH
c. 62 000 UAH
d. 60 000 UAH
e. 2 000 UAH
857. A pharmacy makes aqueous extracts. What extractant is used in preparation of infusions and decoctions?
*a. Purified water
b. Mint oil
c. Peach oil
d. Glycerin
e. Ethyl alcohol
858. A pharmacy makes aqueous extracts. What extractant is used in preparation of infusions and decoctions?
a. Glycerin
b. Ethyl alcohol
c. Mint oil
d. Peach oil
*e. Purified water
859. A pharmacy makes aqueous extracts. What extractant is used in preparation of infusions and decoctions?
a. Mint oil
b. Ethyl alcohol
*c. Purified water
d. Peach oil
e. Glycerin
860. A pharmacy makes medicines according to individual prescriptions. How often must the pharmacy staff change their working clothes?
a. At least once a month
b. At least twice a month
*c. At least twice a week
d. At least once per shift
e. At least once a week
861. A pharmacy makes medicines according to individual prescriptions. How often must the pharmacy staff change their working clothes?
a. At least once per shift
b. At least once a month
c. At least twice a month
*d. At least twice a week
e. At least once a week
862. A pharmacy makes medicines according to individual prescriptions. How often must the pharmacy staff change their working clothes?
a. At least once per shift
b. At least once a week
c. At least twice a month
*d. At least twice a week
e. At least once a month
863. A pharmacy manager has drawn up a work schedule for the next month. What type of management activity is aimed at making highly specific, detailed, short-term plans?
*a. Operational planning
b. Financial planning
c. Strategic planning
d. Business planning
e. -
864. A pharmacy manager has drawn up a work schedule for the next month. What type of management activity is aimed at making highly specific, detailed, short-term plans?
a. Strategic planning
*b. Operational planning
c. Business planning
d. Financial planning
e. -
865. A pharmacy manager has drawn up a work schedule for the next month. What type of management activity is aimed at making highly specific, detailed, short-term plans?
a. Strategic planning
b. Financial planning
c. -
*d. Operational planning
e. Business planning
866. A pharmacy must be closed during inventory-taking. How long can this process take?
a. No more than 10 days
*b. No more than 3 days
c. No more than 6 days
d. No more than 7 days
e. No more than 14 days
867. A pharmacy must be closed during inventory-taking. How long can this process take?
a. No more than 10 days
b. No more than 14 days
c. No more than 6 days
*d. No more than 3 days
e. No more than 7 days
868. A pharmacy must be closed during inventory-taking. How long can this process take?
a. No more than 6 days
b. No more than 10 days
*c. No more than 3 days
d. No more than 14 days
e. No more than 7 days
869. A pharmacy must keep the following receipts for 3 years, not counting the present one:
*a. Medicines provided for free or at a discount due to social benefit programs
b. Anabolic steroids at the full price
c. Psychotropic drugs at the full price
d. Clophelin (clonidine) tablets at the full price
e. Narcotic substances in their pure form at the full price
870. A pharmacy must keep the following receipts for 3 years, not counting the present one:
*a. Medicines provided for free or at a discount due to social benefit programs
b. Psychotropic drugs at the full price
c. Anabolic steroids at the full price
d. Clophelin (clonidine) tablets at the full price
e. Narcotic substances in their pure form at the full price
871. A pharmacy must keep the following receipts for 3 years, not counting the present one:
a. Narcotic substances in their pure form at the full price
b. Anabolic steroids at the full price
c. Psychotropic drugs at the full price
*d. Medicines provided for free or at a discount due to social benefit programs
e. Clophelin (clonidine) tablets at the full price
872. A pharmacy needs to prepare a 1% alcohol solution of methylene blue. What concentration of alcohol must be used for this purpose?
a. 40%
b. 70%
c. 90%
*d. 60%
e. 96%
873. A pharmacy needs to prepare a 1% alcohol solution of methylene blue. What concentration of alcohol must be used for this purpose?
a. 40%
b. 90%
*c. 60%
d. 96%
e. 70%
874. A pharmacy needs to prepare a 1% alcohol solution of methylene blue. What concentration of alcohol must be used for this purpose?
a. 70%
b. 40%
c. 96%
*d. 60%
e. 90%
875. A pharmacy needs to prepare a furacilin (nitrofural) solution (1:5000). What are the specifics of furacilin dissolution?
a. In the cold purified water
*b. In the boiling water in the presence of sodium chloride
c. In the purified water, after grinding it down
d. In the purified water, filtered in advance
e. In the minimal amount of ethanol
876. A pharmacy needs to prepare a furacilin (nitrofural) solution (1:5000). What are the specifics of furacilin dissolution?
a. In the minimal amount of ethanol
*b. In the boiling water in the presence of sodium chloride
c. In the purified water, after grinding it down
d. In the purified water, filtered in advance
e. In the cold purified water
877. A pharmacy needs to prepare a furacilin (nitrofural) solution (1:5000). What are the specifics of furacilin dissolution?
a. In the purified water, filtered in advance
b. In the minimal amount of ethanol
c. In the purified water, after grinding it down
d. In the cold purified water
*e. In the boiling water in the presence of sodium chloride
878. A pharmacy offers to its customers a chance to measure their blood pressure. What type of goods is it?
a. Nondurable goods
b. Convenience goods
c. Specialty goods
d. Unsought goods
*e. Service
879. A pharmacy offers to its customers a chance to measure their blood pressure. What type of goods is it?
a. Nondurable goods
b. Unsought goods
c. Convenience goods
*d. Service
e. Specialty goods
880. A pharmacy offers to its customers a chance to measure their blood pressure. What type of goods is it?
a. Unsought goods
*b. Service
c. Specialty goods
d. Nondurable goods
e. Convenience goods
881. A pharmacy opens a bank account to store funds and conduct ongoing business transactions. What kind of account should be opened?
*a. Current
b. Investment
c. Letter of credit
d. Deposit
e. Provisional
882. A pharmacy opens a bank account to store funds and conduct ongoing business transactions. What kind of account should be opened?
a. Letter of credit
*b. Current
c. Provisional
d. Investment
e. Deposit
883. A pharmacy opens a bank account to store funds and conduct ongoing business transactions. What kind of account should be opened?
a. Provisional
b. Investment
c. Letter of credit
d. Deposit
*e. Current
884. A pharmacy owner starts a business in the retail sale of medicines. What document allows the pharmacy owner to trade for cash in his pharmacy?
a. -
*b. Trade patent
c. State registration certificate
d. License for production of medicines
e. Quality certificate
885. A pharmacy owner starts a business in the retail sale of medicines. What document allows the pharmacy owner to trade for cash in his pharmacy?
a. License for production of medicines
b. Quality certificate
c. -
d. State registration certificate
*e. Trade patent
886. A pharmacy owner starts a business in the retail sale of medicines. What document allows the pharmacy owner to trade for cash in his pharmacy?
a. State registration certificate
b. -
*c. Trade patent
d. License for production of medicines
e. Quality certificate
887. A pharmacy pays considerable attention to the technique of medicine placement in the glass cabinets and on the shelves to create favorable conditions for sales and attracting the attention of consumers. Name this set of measures:
a. Advertising
*b. Merchandising
c. Public relations
d. Personal sale
e. Lobbying
888. A pharmacy pays considerable attention to the technique of medicine placement in the glass cabinets and on the shelves to create favorable conditions for sales and attracting the attention of consumers. Name this set of measures:
a. Advertising
b. Lobbying
*c. Merchandising
d. Personal sale
e. Public relations
889. A pharmacy pays considerable attention to the technique of medicine placement in the glass cabinets and on the shelves to create favorable conditions for sales and attracting the attention of consumers. Name this set of measures:
a. Personal sale
b. Lobbying
c. Advertising
*d. Merchandising
e. Public relations
890. A pharmacy prepares 10% sodium chloride injection solution. What sterilization would be optimal in this case?
*a. Autoclave chamber with high-pressure saturated steam
b. Irradiation sterilization
c. Sterile filtration through membrane
d. Gas sterilization
e. Dry-heat sterilization
891. A pharmacy prepares 10% sodium chloride injection solution. What sterilization would be optimal in this case?
a. Dry-heat sterilization
b. Sterile filtration through membrane
c. Gas sterilization
d. Irradiation sterilization
*e. Autoclave chamber with high-pressure saturated steam
892. A pharmacy prepares 10% sodium chloride injection solution. What sterilization would be optimal in this case?
a. Sterile filtration through membrane
*b. Autoclave chamber with high-pressure saturated steam
c. Gas sterilization
d. Irradiation sterilization
e. Dry-heat sterilization
893. A pharmacy prepares a drug that contains a high-molecular compound with unlimited swelling ability. Name this material:
a. Methylcellulose
*b. Pepsin
c. Starch
d. Protargol
e. Gelatine
894. A pharmacy prepares a drug that contains a high-molecular compound with unlimited swelling ability. Name this material:
a. Methylcellulose
b. Gelatine
*c. Pepsin
d. Starch
e. Protargol
895. A pharmacy prepares a drug that contains a high-molecular compound with unlimited swelling ability. Name this material:
a. Methylcellulose
b. Protargol
*c. Pepsin
d. Starch
e. Gelatine
896. A pharmacy prepares an aqueous extract of thermopsis grass. What components should be used to prepare this aqueous extract?
a. Thermopsis grass, sodium bicarbonate, purified water
b. Thermopsis grass, purified water
c. Thermopsis grass, sodium chloride, purified water
*d. Thermopsis grass, hydrochloric acid solution 1:10, purified water
e. Thermopsis tincture, purified water
897. A pharmacy prepares an aqueous extract of thermopsis grass. What components should be used to prepare this aqueous extract?
a. Thermopsis tincture, purified water
b. Thermopsis grass, purified water
c. Thermopsis grass, sodium chloride, purified water
d. Thermopsis grass, sodium bicarbonate, purified water
*e. Thermopsis grass, hydrochloric acid solution 1:10, purified water
898. A pharmacy prepares an aqueous extract of thermopsis grass. What components should be used to prepare this aqueous extract?
a. Thermopsis tincture, purified water
b. Thermopsis grass, sodium chloride, purified water
c. Thermopsis grass, purified water
*d. Thermopsis grass, hydrochloric acid solution 1:10, purified water
e. Thermopsis grass, sodium bicarbonate, purified water
899. A pharmacy prepares drugs by individual prescriptions. How often should the floors be mopped down in the prescription department?
*a. Once in a shift
b. Once every 10 days
c. Once in a week
d. Once every 5 days
e. Once every 3 days
900. A pharmacy prepares drugs by individual prescriptions. How often should the floors be mopped down in the prescription department?
a. Once every 3 days
b. Once in a week
*c. Once in a shift
d. Once every 5 days
e. Once every 10 days
901. A pharmacy prepares drugs by individual prescriptions. How often should the floors be mopped down in the prescription department?
a. Once every 3 days
b. Once in a week
c. Once every 5 days
*d. Once in a shift
e. Once every 10 days
902. A pharmacy prepares extemporaneous drugs. Who sets the retail prices and labor charges for these pharmacy-made medicines?
a. Inspectorate for medicine quality  control
b. Regional state administration
c. The Ministry of Health
*d. Pharmacy
e. Local council
903. A pharmacy prepares extemporaneous drugs. Who sets the retail prices and labor charges for these pharmacy-made medicines?
a. Local council
b. Regional state administration
c. The Ministry of Health
*d. Pharmacy
e. Inspectorate for medicine quality  control
904. A pharmacy prepares extemporaneous drugs. Who sets the retail prices and labor charges for these pharmacy-made medicines?
a. Regional state administration
b. The Ministry of Health
c. Inspectorate for medicine quality  control
d. Local council
*e. Pharmacy
905. A pharmacy prepares sodium chloride solutions for injections or infusions. What are the additional requirements to the quality of sodium chloride for infusion solutions?
a. No manganese salt admixtures
b. Analytical grade pure
c. Anhydrous, analytical grade pure
d. Type <<for injections>>
*e. Chemically pure, depyrogenated
906. A pharmacy prepares sodium chloride solutions for injections or infusions. What are the additional requirements to the quality of sodium chloride for infusion solutions?
a. Type <<for injections>>
*b. Chemically pure, depyrogenated
c. Analytical grade pure
d. No manganese salt admixtures
e. Anhydrous, analytical grade pure
907. A pharmacy prepares sodium chloride solutions for injections or infusions. What are the additional requirements to the quality of sodium chloride for infusion solutions?
a. Type <<for injections>>
b. No manganese salt admixtures
c. Analytical grade pure
*d. Chemically pure, depyrogenated
e. Anhydrous, analytical grade pure
908. A pharmacy provides certain categories of ill persons with medicines free of charge or at a reduced price. What conditions allow free of charge supply of out-patients with necessary medicines?
a. Cold
b. Headache
*c. Diabetes mellitus
d. Cuts and abrasions
e. Muscle pain
909. A pharmacy provides certain categories of ill persons with medicines free of charge or at a reduced price. What conditions allow free of charge supply of out-patients with necessary medicines?
a. Cuts and abrasions
*b. Diabetes mellitus
c. Muscle pain
d. Headache
e. Cold
910. A pharmacy provides certain categories of ill persons with medicines free of charge or at a reduced price. What conditions allow free of charge supply of out-patients with necessary medicines?
a. Cuts and abrasions
b. Cold
*c. Diabetes mellitus
d. Muscle pain
e. Headache
911. A pharmacy receives centralized deliveries of goods from the warehouse. Specify the document that is textbfNOT NECESSARY for accounting of goods receipt by the pharmacy:
a. Financial operating report of the pharmacy
*b. Cash receipt order
c. Goods received record book by item and supplier
d. Goods report (Inventory change report)
e. Goods received record book by groups of goods
912. A pharmacy receives centralized deliveries of goods from the warehouse. Specify the document that is textbfNOT NECESSARY for accounting of goods receipt by the pharmacy:
a. Goods received record book by groups of goods
b. Financial operating report of the pharmacy
*c. Cash receipt order
d. Goods received record book by item and supplier
e. Goods report (Inventory change report)
913. A pharmacy receives centralized deliveries of goods from the warehouse. Specify the document that is textbfNOT NECESSARY for accounting of goods receipt by the pharmacy:
a. Goods received record book by item and supplier
*b. Cash receipt order
c. Goods report (Inventory change report)
d. Financial operating report of the pharmacy
e. Goods received record book by groups of goods
914. A pharmacy sells various medicines. What medicine is a subject to strict accounting in a special inventory log?
*a. Tramadol, tablets
b. Retabolil (Nandrolone)
c. Gentamicin sulfate
d. Hydrocortisone acetate
e. Microfollin (Ethinylestradiol), tablets
915. A pharmacy sells various medicines. What medicine is a subject to strict accounting in a special inventory log?
a. Microfollin (Ethinylestradiol), tablets
b. Gentamicin sulfate
*c. Tramadol, tablets
d. Retabolil (Nandrolone)
e. Hydrocortisone acetate
916. A pharmacy sells various medicines. What medicine is a subject to strict accounting in a special inventory log?
a. Retabolil (Nandrolone)
b. Microfollin (Ethinylestradiol), tablets
*c. Tramadol, tablets
d. Gentamicin sulfate
e. Hydrocortisone acetate
917. A pharmacy supplies the surgical ward of a hospital. What document enables the dispensing chemist to supply the goods:
a. Product revaluation notice
b. Report on the movement of packaging
*c. Purchase order
d. Receipt log book
e. Consolidated register
918. A pharmacy supplies the surgical ward of a hospital. What document enables the dispensing chemist to supply the goods:
a. Receipt log book
b. Consolidated register
c. Report on the movement of packaging
d. Product revaluation notice
*e. Purchase order
919. A pharmacy supplies the surgical ward of a hospital. What document enables the dispensing chemist to supply the goods:
a. Receipt log book
b. Report on the movement of packaging
*c. Purchase order
d. Consolidated register
e. Product revaluation notice
920. A pharmacy supplies with medicines various groups of patients. Children of what age group receive drugs for free during their outpatient treatment?
*a. Under 3 years of age
b. Under 10 years of age
c. From 3 to 6 years of age
d. Under 6 years of age
e. Under 16 years of age
921. A pharmacy supplies with medicines various groups of patients. Children of what age group receive drugs for free during their outpatient treatment?
a. From 3 to 6 years of age
b. Under 10 years of age
c. Under 6 years of age
*d. Under 3 years of age
e. Under 16 years of age
922. A pharmacy supplies with medicines various groups of patients. Children of what age group receive drugs for free during their outpatient treatment?
a. From 3 to 6 years of age
b. Under 16 years of age
*c. Under 3 years of age
d. Under 10 years of age
e. Under 6 years of age
923. A pharmacy underwent a drug quality inspection on 25.02.2018. The inspector discovered that the pharmacy had a batch of Nimesil (Nimesulide) drug, dosage form 2 g x 30 sachets, with its registration certificate expired on 24.02.2018. Is the pharamacy allowed to sell this drug?
a. Yes, if approved by the head manager of the pharmacy
*b. No
c. Yes, with permit from the Pharmacopoeia Center
d. Yes, it can sell all the batch that is already in its possession
e. Yes, with permit from the State Inspectorate
924. A pharmacy underwent a drug quality inspection on 25.02.2018. The inspector discovered that the pharmacy had a batch of Nimesil (Nimesulide) drug, dosage form 2 g x 30 sachets, with its registration certificate expired on 24.02.2018. Is the pharamacy allowed to sell this drug?
a. Yes, it can sell all the batch that is already in its possession
b. Yes, with permit from the Pharmacopoeia Center
*c. No
d. Yes, if approved by the head manager of the pharmacy
e. Yes, with permit from the State Inspectorate
925. A pharmacy underwent a drug quality inspection on 25.02.2018. The inspector discovered that the pharmacy had a batch of Nimesil (Nimesulide) drug, dosage form 2 g x 30 sachets, with its registration certificate expired on 24.02.2018. Is the pharamacy allowed to sell this drug?
a. Yes, with permit from the State Inspectorate
b. Yes, with permit from the Pharmacopoeia Center
*c. No
d. Yes, it can sell all the batch that is already in its possession
e. Yes, if approved by the head manager of the pharmacy
926. A pharmacy visitor approached the pharmacist with complaints of constrictiong retrosternal pain that radiates under the left scapula. The pain occurred after physical exertion and lasts approximately 5 minutes already. What medicine should be recommended to this visitor to stop the pain attack?
*a. Nitroglycerin
b. Diclofenac sodium
c. Captopril
d. Bisoprolol
e. Drotaverine
927. A pharmacy visitor approached the pharmacist with complaints of constrictiong retrosternal pain that radiates under the left scapula. The pain occurred after physical exertion and lasts approximately 5 minutes already. What medicine should be recommended to this visitor to stop the pain attack?
*a. Nitroglycerin
b. Diclofenac sodium
c. Drotaverine
d. Captopril
e. Bisoprolol
928. A pharmacy visitor approached the pharmacist with complaints of constrictiong retrosternal pain that radiates under the left scapula. The pain occurred after physical exertion and lasts approximately 5 minutes already. What medicine should be recommended to this visitor to stop the pain attack?
a. Captopril
b. Bisoprolol
c. Drotaverine
*d. Nitroglycerin
e. Diclofenac sodium
929. A pharmacy visitor asked the pharmacist to recommend her an anthelmintic drug that would be effective against Ascaris roundworms. Select one such drug from the list.
*a. Piperazine
b. Riboflavin
c. Calcitonin
d. Ribavirin
e. Pyrazinamide
930. A pharmacy visitor asked the pharmacist to recommend her an anthelmintic drug that would be effective against Ascaris roundworms. Select one such drug from the list.
a. Calcitonin
b. Ribavirin
c. Riboflavin
*d. Piperazine
e. Pyrazinamide
931. A pharmacy visitor periodically feels constricting pain behind the sternum. Explain to this visitor, what contraindication exists for taking nitroglycerin.
*a. Angle-closure glaucoma
b. Pulmonary fibrosis
c. Heart failure
d. Kidney failure
e. Peptic ulcer disease
932. A pharmacy visitor periodically feels constricting pain behind the sternum. Explain to this visitor, what contraindication exists for taking nitroglycerin.
a. Heart failure
b. Kidney failure
*c. Angle-closure glaucoma
d. Pulmonary fibrosis
e. Peptic ulcer disease
933. A pharmacy visitor periodically feels constricting pain behind the sternum. Explain to this visitor, what contraindication exists for taking nitroglycerin.
a. Kidney failure
b. Pulmonary fibrosis
*c. Angle-closure glaucoma
d. Heart failure
e. Peptic ulcer disease
934. A pharmacy warehouse has received a shipment of drugs. During quality control by an authorized person, there were some drugs of questionable quality detected. What measures should be taken by the authorized person in this case?
*a. Samples of questionable drugs should be sent to the local inspectorate department; the rest of the drug shipment should be quarantined with marking ''Do not sell until further notice''
b. Draw up a Quality Assessment Report with the defects listed and allow sale of the drug shipment
c. Dispose of the shipment that contains questionable drugs
d. Return the shipment to the manufacturer
e. Allow sale of the drug shipment
935. A pharmacy warehouse has received a shipment of drugs. During quality control by an authorized person, there were some drugs of questionable quality detected. What measures should be taken by the authorized person in this case?
a. Draw up a Quality Assessment Report with the defects listed and allow sale of the drug shipment
b. Return the shipment to the manufacturer
*c. Samples of questionable drugs should be sent to the local inspectorate department; the rest of the drug shipment should be quarantined with marking ''Do not sell until further notice''
d. Dispose of the shipment that contains questionable drugs
e. Allow sale of the drug shipment
936. A pharmacy warehouse has received a shipment of drugs. During quality control by an authorized person, there were some drugs of questionable quality detected. What measures should be taken by the authorized person in this case?
a. Return the shipment to the manufacturer
*b. Samples of questionable drugs should be sent to the local inspectorate department; the rest of the drug shipment should be quarantined with marking ''Do not sell until further notice''
c. Dispose of the shipment that contains questionable drugs
d. Draw up a Quality Assessment Report with the defects listed and allow sale of the drug shipment
e. Allow sale of the drug shipment
937. A phytochemical department of a factory produces Calendula tincture. What herbal raw material is used in the manufacturing process?
a. Grass
b. Roots
c. Roots, rhizomes, and grass
d. Leaves and essential oil
*e. Flowers
938. A phytochemical department of a factory produces Calendula tincture. What herbal raw material is used in the manufacturing process?
a. Leaves and essential oil
b. Roots
c. Grass
d. Roots, rhizomes, and grass
*e. Flowers
939. A phytochemical department of a factory produces Calendula tincture. What herbal raw material is used in the manufacturing process?
a. Roots, rhizomes, and grass
b. Roots
c. Leaves and essential oil
d. Grass
*e. Flowers
940. A potassium permanganate solution needs to be prepared for a patient. What solvent should be used in this case?
a. Demineralized water
*b. Freshly prepared purified water
c. Ethyl alcohol
d. Mint water
e. Water for injections
941. A potassium permanganate solution needs to be prepared for a patient. What solvent should be used in this case?
a. Mint water
*b. Freshly prepared purified water
c. Ethyl alcohol
d. Water for injections
e. Demineralized water
942. A potassium permanganate solution needs to be prepared for a patient. What solvent should be used in this case?
a. Mint water
b. Water for injections
c. Demineralized water
d. Ethyl alcohol
*e. Freshly prepared purified water
943. A powder containing a substance with specific weight has been prepared in a pharmacy. Name this substance:
a. Bolus alba
*b. Basic bismuth nitrate
c. Talcum
d. Sodium bicarbonate
e. Sugar
944. A powder containing a substance with specific weight has been prepared in a pharmacy. Name this substance:
a. Sugar
b. Talcum
*c. Basic bismuth nitrate
d. Bolus alba
e. Sodium bicarbonate
945. A powder containing a substance with specific weight has been prepared in a pharmacy. Name this substance:
a. Talcum
b. Sodium bicarbonate
c. Bolus alba
*d. Basic bismuth nitrate
e. Sugar
946. A powder with a hard to disintegrate substance has been made in a pharmacy. Specify this substance:
*a. Camphor
b. Osarsolum (Acetarsol)
c. Sugar
d. Sodium chlorides
e. Talcum
947. A powder with a hard to disintegrate substance has been made in a pharmacy. Specify this substance:
a. Sodium chlorides
b. Talcum
c. Osarsolum (Acetarsol)
*d. Camphor
e. Sugar
948. A powder with a hard to disintegrate substance has been made in a pharmacy. Specify this substance:
a. Sugar
b. Sodium chlorides
c. Osarsolum (Acetarsol)
d. Talcum
*e. Camphor
949. A pregnant woman complains of elevated blood pressure up to 160/100. What hypotensive drug should she use in this case?
a. Enalapril
*b. Methyldopa
c. Bisoprolol
d. Losartan
e. Reserpine
950. A pregnant woman complains of elevated blood pressure up to 160/100. What hypotensive drug should she use in this case?
a. Enalapril
b. Bisoprolol
c. Losartan
*d. Methyldopa
e. Reserpine
951. A pregnant woman complains of elevated blood pressure up to 160/100. What hypotensive drug should she use in this case?
a. Reserpine
b. Losartan
c. Bisoprolol
*d. Methyldopa
e. Enalapril
952. A pregnant woman with signs of acute rhinitis came to a pharmacy. What drug for symptomatic treatment of rhinitis will be the safest in this case?
*a. Salt solutions based on iso- and hypotonic sodium chloride solutions
b. Xylometazoline preparations
c. Beclomethasone preparations
d. Cromoglicic acid preparations
e. Essential oil-based preparations
953. A pregnant woman with signs of acute rhinitis came to a pharmacy. What drug for symptomatic treatment of rhinitis will be the safest in this case?
a. Beclomethasone preparations
b. Essential oil-based preparations
c. Xylometazoline preparations
d. Cromoglicic acid preparations
*e. Salt solutions based on iso- and hypotonic sodium chloride solutions
954. A pregnant woman with signs of acute rhinitis came to a pharmacy. What drug for symptomatic treatment of rhinitis will be the safest in this case?
a. Essential oil-based preparations
b. Beclomethasone preparations
c. Xylometazoline preparations
*d. Salt solutions based on iso- and hypotonic sodium chloride solutions
e. Cromoglicic acid preparations
955. A prescription does not specify the shape of rectal suppositories. What shape would be optimal in such case and therefore should be used by the pharmacist?
a. Pessary
*b. Torpedo
c. Cylinder
d. Ovoid
e. Sphere
956. A prescription does not specify the shape of rectal suppositories. What shape would be optimal in such case and therefore should be used by the pharmacist?
a. Pessary
b. Ovoid
c. Cylinder
*d. Torpedo
e. Sphere
957. A prescription does not specify the shape of rectal suppositories. What shape would be optimal in such case and therefore should be used by the pharmacist?
a. Sphere
b. Cylinder
c. Ovoid
*d. Torpedo
e. Pessary
958. A private pharmacy has received a supply of a drug with 2,3-dihydro-2-methyl-1,4-naphthoquinone-2-sulfonate sodium as an active ingredient. Name this drug:
*a. Vicasol (Menadione)
b. Rutin
c. Riboflavin
d. Ergocalciferol
e. Cocarboxylase hydrochloride
959. A private pharmacy has received a supply of a drug with 2,3-dihydro-2-methyl-1,4-naphthoquinone-2-sulfonate sodium as an active ingredient. Name this drug:
a. Rutin
*b. Vicasol (Menadione)
c. Cocarboxylase hydrochloride
d. Riboflavin
e. Ergocalciferol
960. A private pharmacy has received a supply of a drug with 2,3-dihydro-2-methyl-1,4-naphthoquinone-2-sulfonate sodium as an active ingredient. Name this drug:
a. Rutin
*b. Vicasol (Menadione)
c. Ergocalciferol
d. Riboflavin
e. Cocarboxylase hydrochloride
961. A process dealing with drawing the documents, their processing, circulation and storage is called records management. If all documents circulate through one organization center, - the Office Desk, - then such system of records management is called:
a. Referent
*b. Centralized
c. Mixed
d. Decentralized
e. Specialized
962. A process dealing with drawing the documents, their processing, circulation and storage is called records management. If all documents circulate through one organization center, - the Office Desk, - then such system of records management is called:
a. Referent
b. Mixed
c. Decentralized
d. Specialized
*e. Centralized
963. A process dealing with drawing the documents, their processing, circulation and storage is called records management. If all documents circulate through one organization center, - the Office Desk, - then such system of records management is called:
a. Specialized
b. Decentralized
c. Mixed
*d. Centralized
e. Referent
964. A refractometer is used to identify and test the glycerine substance. What parameter is measured using this device?
a. Angle of rotation
b. Melting point
c. Optical density
d. Dynamic viscosity
*e. Refractive index
965. A refractometer is used to identify and test the glycerine substance. What parameter is measured using this device?
a. Optical density
b. Angle of rotation
c. Dynamic viscosity
d. Melting point
*e. Refractive index
966. A refractometer is used to identify and test the glycerine substance. What parameter is measured using this device?
a. Optical density
b. Dynamic viscosity
c. Angle of rotation
*d. Refractive index
e. Melting point
967. A regional pharmaceutical market has a large number of pharmaceutical companies, none of which is able to control the market prices. The companies offer interchangeable medicines. What type of market is it?
*a. Market with pure (free) competition
b. Pure monopoly market
c. Oligopolistic market
d. Limited monopoly market
e. -
968. A regional pharmaceutical market has a large number of pharmaceutical companies, none of which is able to control the market prices. The companies offer interchangeable medicines. What type of market is it?
a. -
b. Limited monopoly market
*c. Market with pure (free) competition
d. Oligopolistic market
e. Pure monopoly market
969. A regional pharmaceutical market has a large number of pharmaceutical companies, none of which is able to control the market prices. The companies offer interchangeable medicines. What type of market is it?
a. Oligopolistic market
b. Pure monopoly market
c. -
d. Limited monopoly market
*e. Market with pure (free) competition
970. A set of values, traditions, behavioral norms, and views inherent to an organisation characterizes its following feature:
*a. Culture
b. Profitability
c. Self-development capability
d. Capitalization level
e. Success
971. A set of values, traditions, behavioral norms, and views inherent to an organisation characterizes its following feature:
a. Capitalization level
*b. Culture
c. Profitability
d. Success
e. Self-development capability
972. A set of values, traditions, behavioral norms, and views inherent to an organisation characterizes its following feature:
a. Self-development capability
b. Profitability
c. Success
*d. Culture
e. Capitalization level
973. A substance was received for analysis. The substance is a round seed 1-1,8 mm in diameter, yellow with bluish tint. When mashed with water, emits characteristic irritant odor; is sharp and acrid to taste. The raw material can be identified as:
*a. Mustard seeds
b. Plantago psyllium seeds
c. Flax seeds
d. Nigella seeds
e. Fenugreek seeds
974. A substance was received for analysis. The substance is a round seed 1-1,8 mm in diameter, yellow with bluish tint. When mashed with water, emits characteristic irritant odor; is sharp and acrid to taste. The raw material can be identified as:
a. Flax seeds
*b. Mustard seeds
c. Nigella seeds
d. Fenugreek seeds
e. Plantago psyllium seeds
975. A substance was received for analysis. The substance is a round seed 1-1,8 mm in diameter, yellow with bluish tint. When mashed with water, emits characteristic irritant odor; is sharp and acrid to taste. The raw material can be identified as:
a. Flax seeds
b. Fenugreek seeds
*c. Mustard seeds
d. Nigella seeds
e. Plantago psyllium seeds
976. A sum of properties that make the medicines capable of meeting the needs of the consumers, when used as intended, is called:
*a. Quality
b. Pharmacological action
c. Trade dress
d. Appearance
e. Marking
977. A sum of properties that make the medicines capable of meeting the needs of the consumers, when used as intended, is called:
a. Appearance
*b. Quality
c. Trade dress
d. Marking
e. Pharmacological action
978. A sum of properties that make the medicines capable of meeting the needs of the consumers, when used as intended, is called:
a. Pharmacological action
b. Marking
c. Trade dress
*d. Quality
e. Appearance
979. A system of indicators characterizes financial and businesss activity of an organization and the state of its assets and sources on the certain day in the monetary unit. Name this system:
*a. Balance sheet
b. Receipts and expenditures report
c. Turnover balance sheet
d. Double entry
e. Business transactions log book
980. A system of indicators characterizes financial and businesss activity of an organization and the state of its assets and sources on the certain day in the monetary unit. Name this system:
a. Business transactions log book
b. Receipts and expenditures report
*c. Balance sheet
d. Turnover balance sheet
e. Double entry
981. A system of indicators characterizes financial and businesss activity of an organization and the state of its assets and sources on the certain day in the monetary unit. Name this system:
a. Receipts and expenditures report
b. Business transactions log book
*c. Balance sheet
d. Double entry
e. Turnover balance sheet
982. A technological controller uses Marquis reagent to identify the substance of acetylsalicylic acid after acid hydrolysis. Positive effect of the reaction would be indicated by the following coloring:
*a. Pink
b. Violet
c. Blue
d. Yellow
e. Green
983. A technological controller uses Marquis reagent to identify the substance of acetylsalicylic acid after acid hydrolysis. Positive effect of the reaction would be indicated by the following coloring:
a. Blue
*b. Pink
c. Yellow
d. Violet
e. Green
984. A teenager with hyporexia has been recommended to drink medicinal herbal tea of the following composition: Herba Absinthii, Herba Millefolii. Specify the characteristic microscopic features of Artemisia absinthium, which indicate its presence in the herb mixture:
*a. T-shaped hairs along the leaf edge
b. Branched, simple and ciliated hairs
c. Retor-shaped hairs
d. Simple and capitate hairs
e. Branched and capitate hairs
985. A teenager with hyporexia has been recommended to drink medicinal herbal tea of the following composition: Herba Absinthii, Herba Millefolii. Specify the characteristic microscopic features of Artemisia absinthium, which indicate its presence in the herb mixture:
*a. T-shaped hairs along the leaf edge
b. Retor-shaped hairs
c. Branched and capitate hairs
d. Simple and capitate hairs
e. Branched, simple and ciliated hairs
986. A teenager with hyporexia has been recommended to drink medicinal herbal tea of the following composition: Herba Absinthii, Herba Millefolii. Specify the characteristic microscopic features of Artemisia absinthium, which indicate its presence in the herb mixture:
a. Simple and capitate hairs
b. Branched, simple and ciliated hairs
c. Retor-shaped hairs
*d. T-shaped hairs along the leaf edge
e. Branched and capitate hairs
987. A thymol-containing herbal raw material is stored in the warehouse of a pharmaceutical company. What are its proper storage conditions?
a. Under the temperature of -5^oC
b. Under СО_2-free conditions
c. Under normal conditions
*d. Separate from the others
e. In metal containers
988. A thymol-containing herbal raw material is stored in the warehouse of a pharmaceutical company. What are its proper storage conditions?
a. Under СО_2-free conditions
b. In metal containers
*c. Separate from the others
d. Under normal conditions
e. Under the temperature of -5^oC
989. A thymol-containing herbal raw material is stored in the warehouse of a pharmaceutical company. What are its proper storage conditions?
a. Under СО_2-free conditions
b. Under the temperature of -5^oC
*c. Separate from the others
d. In metal containers
e. Under normal conditions
990. A tincture of Fructus Capsici is used as a distracting agent and an irritant in cases of neuralgia, radiculitis, and myositis. What bioactive substance of Fructus Capsici has such an effect?
*a. Capsaicin
b. Ephedrine
c. Colchicine
d. Schisandrin
e. Inulin
991. A tincture of Fructus Capsici is used as a distracting agent and an irritant in cases of neuralgia, radiculitis, and myositis. What bioactive substance of Fructus Capsici has such an effect?
a. Colchicine
b. Ephedrine
c. Schisandrin
d. Inulin
*e. Capsaicin
992. A tincture of Fructus Capsici is used as a distracting agent and an irritant in cases of neuralgia, radiculitis, and myositis. What bioactive substance of Fructus Capsici has such an effect?
a. Ephedrine
b. Inulin
c. Schisandrin
d. Colchicine
*e. Capsaicin
993. A woman at the third trimester of her pregnancy fell ill with pneumonia. A doctor prescribed her a fluoroquinolone. What negative effect can it have on the fetus?
*a. Chondrotoxic
b. Nephrotoxic
c. Neurotoxic
d. Hematotoxic
e. Hepatotoxic
994. A woman at the third trimester of her pregnancy fell ill with pneumonia. A doctor prescribed her a fluoroquinolone. What negative effect can it have on the fetus?
*a. Chondrotoxic
b. Neurotoxic
c. Hepatotoxic
d. Nephrotoxic
e. Hematotoxic
995. A woman at the third trimester of her pregnancy fell ill with pneumonia. A doctor prescribed her a fluoroquinolone. What negative effect can it have on the fetus?
a. Hematotoxic
b. Hepatotoxic
*c. Chondrotoxic
d. Nephrotoxic
e. Neurotoxic
996. A woman came to a doctor with complaints of heartburn. She has been taking diclofenac sodium for a long time due to diagnosed rheumatoid arthritis. What medicine can the doctor prescribe for the prevention of gastropathy?
*a. Omeprazole
b. Papaverine hydrochloride
c. Acetylsalicylic acid
d. Metoclopramide
e. Clarithromycin
997. A woman came to a doctor with complaints of heartburn. She has been taking diclofenac sodium for a long time due to diagnosed rheumatoid arthritis. What medicine can the doctor prescribe for the prevention of gastropathy?
a. Acetylsalicylic acid
b. Metoclopramide
*c. Omeprazole
d. Clarithromycin
e. Papaverine hydrochloride
998. A woman came to a doctor with complaints of heartburn. She has been taking diclofenac sodium for a long time due to diagnosed rheumatoid arthritis. What medicine can the doctor prescribe for the prevention of gastropathy?
a. Metoclopramide
*b. Omeprazole
c. Acetylsalicylic acid
d. Clarithromycin
e. Papaverine hydrochloride
999. A woman suddenly developed an angina pectoris attack. To arrest the attack, she took a medicine that caused her a severe headache, facial hyperemia, and tachycardia. Such side effects are characteristic of the following group of drugs:
*a. Nitrates
b. Alpha-adrenergic agonists
c. Antispasmodics
d. Beta-adrenergic antagonists
e. Calcium channel blockers
1000. A woman suddenly developed an angina pectoris attack. To arrest the attack, she took a medicine that caused her a severe headache, facial hyperemia, and tachycardia. Such side effects are characteristic of the following group of drugs:
a. Beta-adrenergic antagonists
*b. Nitrates
c. Antispasmodics
d. Calcium channel blockers
e. Alpha-adrenergic agonists
1001. A woman suddenly developed an angina pectoris attack. To arrest the attack, she took a medicine that caused her a severe headache, facial hyperemia, and tachycardia. Such side effects are characteristic of the following group of drugs:
a. Beta-adrenergic antagonists
b. Alpha-adrenergic agonists
*c. Nitrates
d. Calcium channel blockers
e. Antispasmodics
1002. A woman wants to stock the home first aid kid for her 4-month-old baby. She asked a dispensing chemist to recommend her an antipyretic for this purpose. What medicine and what dosage form would you recommend in this case?
a. Acetylsalicylic acid powder
b. Diclofenac sodium tablets
*c. Paracetamol rectal suppositories
d. Ibuprofen tablets
e. Acetylsalicylic acid tablets
1003. A woman wants to stock the home first aid kid for her 4-month-old baby. She asked a dispensing chemist to recommend her an antipyretic for this purpose. What medicine and what dosage form would you recommend in this case?
a. Ibuprofen tablets
b. Acetylsalicylic acid tablets
*c. Paracetamol rectal suppositories
d. Acetylsalicylic acid powder
e. Diclofenac sodium tablets
1004. A woman with chronic bronchitis was prescribed azithromycin. After a time, she developed complaints of abdominal pain and distension, diarrhea, nausea, and vomiting. What side effect is observed in this patient?
*a. Dysbiosis
b. Allergic response
c. Chondrotoxicity
d. Photosensitization
e. Nephrotoxicity
1005. A woman with chronic bronchitis was prescribed azithromycin. After a time, she developed complaints of abdominal pain and distension, diarrhea, nausea, and vomiting. What side effect is observed in this patient?
*a. Dysbiosis
b. Chondrotoxicity
c. Nephrotoxicity
d. Photosensitization
e. Allergic response
1006. A woman with chronic bronchitis was prescribed azithromycin. After a time, she developed complaints of abdominal pain and distension, diarrhea, nausea, and vomiting. What side effect is observed in this patient?
a. Chondrotoxicity
b. Allergic response
c. Photosensitization
d. Nephrotoxicity
*e. Dysbiosis
1007. A woman with diabetes mellitus has developed hypoglycemia after insulin overdose. What measures should be taken at the first signs of hypoglycemia?
a. Introduce 0.1% adrenaline solution subcutaneously
b. Give nitroglycerine sublingually
c. Make an insulin injection
d. Make an intramuscular injection of caffeine
*e. Give the patient a sugar lump to eat and a cup of warm sweetened tea
1008. A woman with diabetes mellitus has developed hypoglycemia after insulin overdose. What measures should be taken at the first signs of hypoglycemia?
a. Introduce 0.1% adrenaline solution subcutaneously
b. Make an intramuscular injection of caffeine
c. Make an insulin injection
*d. Give the patient a sugar lump to eat and a cup of warm sweetened tea
e. Give nitroglycerine sublingually
1009. A woman with diabetes mellitus has developed hypoglycemia after insulin overdose. What measures should be taken at the first signs of hypoglycemia?
a. Make an insulin injection
b. Make an intramuscular injection of caffeine
c. Give nitroglycerine sublingually
d. Introduce 0.1% adrenaline solution subcutaneously
*e. Give the patient a sugar lump to eat and a cup of warm sweetened tea
1010. A woman with diabetes mellitus has injected herself with 30 units of insulin. After that she developed weakness and came to the pharmacy to ask for help. In the pharmacy she lost her consciousness and developed convulsions. What should she be given immediately?
a. Butamide (Tolbutamide)
*b. Glucose
c. Insulin
d. Glibenclamid
e. Metformin
1011. A woman with diabetes mellitus has injected herself with 30 units of insulin. After that she developed weakness and came to the pharmacy to ask for help. In the pharmacy she lost her consciousness and developed convulsions. What should she be given immediately?
a. Metformin
*b. Glucose
c. Butamide (Tolbutamide)
d. Insulin
e. Glibenclamid
1012. A woman with diabetes mellitus has injected herself with 30 units of insulin. After that she developed weakness and came to the pharmacy to ask for help. In the pharmacy she lost her consciousness and developed convulsions. What should she be given immediately?
a. Metformin
b. Glibenclamid
c. Butamide (Tolbutamide)
*d. Glucose
e. Insulin
1013. A woman with open tuberculosis is undergoing in-patient treatment in the tuberculosis clinic. What drug was prescribed by her physician for etiotropic treatment?
*a. Isoniazid
b. Acyclovir
c. Metronidazole
d. Benzylpenicillin (Penicillin G)
e. Doxycycline hydrochloride
1014. A woman with open tuberculosis is undergoing in-patient treatment in the tuberculosis clinic. What drug was prescribed by her physician for etiotropic treatment?
a. Benzylpenicillin (Penicillin G)
*b. Isoniazid
c. Acyclovir
d. Doxycycline hydrochloride
e. Metronidazole
1015. A woman with open tuberculosis is undergoing in-patient treatment in the tuberculosis clinic. What drug was prescribed by her physician for etiotropic treatment?
a. Benzylpenicillin (Penicillin G)
*b. Isoniazid
c. Metronidazole
d. Acyclovir
e. Doxycycline hydrochloride
1016. A young mother has come to a pharmacy to buy an antipyretic drug for her 3-month-old infant. What dosage form would you choose for the infant?
a. Capsules
*b. Suppositories
c. Spray
d. Lozenges
e. Tablets
1017. A young mother has come to a pharmacy to buy an antipyretic drug for her 3-month-old infant. What dosage form would you choose for the infant?
a. Capsules
b. Spray
c. Lozenges
*d. Suppositories
e. Tablets
1018. A young mother has come to a pharmacy to buy an antipyretic drug for her 3-month-old infant. What dosage form would you choose for the infant?
a. Tablets
*b. Suppositories
c. Lozenges
d. Capsules
e. Spray
1019. According to Decree №360 issued by the Ministry of Health of Ukraine, there is a list of medicines that cannot be prescribed to outpatients. Select one such drug from the list below:
*a. Nitrous oxide
b. Tramadol
c. Zopiklon
d. Atropine sulfate
e. Tetracaine
1020. According to Decree №360 issued by the Ministry of Health of Ukraine, there is a list of medicines that cannot be prescribed to outpatients. Select one such drug from the list below:
a. Atropine sulfate
b. Tetracaine
c. Tramadol
d. Zopiklon
*e. Nitrous oxide
1021. According to Decree №360 issued by the Ministry of Health of Ukraine, there is a list of medicines that cannot be prescribed to outpatients. Select one such drug from the list below:
a. Atropine sulfate
b. Zopiklon
*c. Nitrous oxide
d. Tramadol
e. Tetracaine
1022. According to ecological survey, a certain pharmaceutical manufacturer holds the first place among the local ''green'' industries. What marketing concept is chosen by this manufacturer in relations with its customers?
a. Intensification of commercial effort
b. Integrated marketing
c. Production development
d. Product development
*e. Socio-ethical marketing
1023. According to ecological survey, a certain pharmaceutical manufacturer holds the first place among the local ''green'' industries. What marketing concept is chosen by this manufacturer in relations with its customers?
a. Product development
b. Integrated marketing
c. Intensification of commercial effort
d. Production development
*e. Socio-ethical marketing
1024. According to ecological survey, a certain pharmaceutical manufacturer holds the first place among the local ''green'' industries. What marketing concept is chosen by this manufacturer in relations with its customers?
a. Production development
b. Integrated marketing
*c. Socio-ethical marketing
d. Product development
e. Intensification of commercial effort
1025. According to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine monograph, alkalimetry should be used for the quantitative determination of the nicotinic acid. What is used as an indicator in this case?
*a. Phenolphthalein
b. Calconcarbonic acid
c. Sodium eosinate
d. Methylene blue
e. Potassium chromate
1026. According to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine monograph, alkalimetry should be used for the quantitative determination of the nicotinic acid. What is used as an indicator in this case?
a. Potassium chromate
b. Calconcarbonic acid
c. Sodium eosinate
*d. Phenolphthalein
e. Methylene blue
1027. According to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine monograph, alkalimetry should be used for the quantitative determination of the nicotinic acid. What is used as an indicator in this case?
a. Potassium chromate
b. Sodium eosinate
c. Calconcarbonic acid
d. Methylene blue
*e. Phenolphthalein
1028. According to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine quantitative content of salicylic acid is to be determined by means of:
a. Acidimetry
*b. Alkalimetry
c. Argentometry
d. Nitritometric titration
e. Complexometric titration
1029. According to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine quantitative content of salicylic acid is to be determined by means of:
a. Acidimetry
b. Argentometry
*c. Alkalimetry
d. Complexometric titration
e. Nitritometric titration
1030. According to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine quantitative content of salicylic acid is to be determined by means of:
a. Argentometry
b. Complexometric titration
c. Nitritometric titration
d. Acidimetry
*e. Alkalimetry
1031. According to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine regulations, valine amino acid should be identified by means of thin-layer chromatography. To develop a chromatogram, the following reagent should be used:
*a. Ninhydrin
b. 2,4-Dinitrochlorobenzene
c. Cyanogen bromide
d. Concentrated ammonia
e. 2,4-Dinitrophenylhydrazine
1032. According to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine regulations, valine amino acid should be identified by means of thin-layer chromatography. To develop a chromatogram, the following reagent should be used:
*a. Ninhydrin
b. 2,4-Dinitrophenylhydrazine
c. Cyanogen bromide
d. Concentrated ammonia
e. 2,4-Dinitrochlorobenzene
1033. According to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine regulations, valine amino acid should be identified by means of thin-layer chromatography. To develop a chromatogram, the following reagent should be used:
a. Concentrated ammonia
*b. Ninhydrin
c. Cyanogen bromide
d. 2,4-Dinitrophenylhydrazine
e. 2,4-Dinitrochlorobenzene
1034. According to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine, an analytical chemist can determine sulfate admixtures in sodium tetraborate by the effect of white opalescence that results from its reaction with the following solution:
*a. Barium chloride
b. Ammonium oxalate
c. Sodium sulfide
d. Magnesium sulfate
e. Silver nitrate
1035. According to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine, an analytical chemist can determine sulfate admixtures in sodium tetraborate by the effect of white opalescence that results from its reaction with the following solution:
a. Silver nitrate
b. Magnesium sulfate
c. Sodium sulfide
d. Ammonium oxalate
*e. Barium chloride
1036. According to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine, an analytical chemist can determine sulfate admixtures in sodium tetraborate by the effect of white opalescence that results from its reaction with the following solution:
a. Sodium sulfide
*b. Barium chloride
c. Silver nitrate
d. Magnesium sulfate
e. Ammonium oxalate
1037. According to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine, an analytical chemist determines quantitative content of potassium acetate by means of acidimetry in non-aqueous medium. Name the volumetric solution in this case:
a. Iodine
b. Potassium bromate
c. Sodium hydroxide
*d. Perchloric acid
e. Sodium nitrite
1038. According to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine, an analytical chemist determines quantitative content of potassium acetate by means of acidimetry in non-aqueous medium. Name the volumetric solution in this case:
a. Potassium bromate
b. Sodium nitrite
*c. Perchloric acid
d. Sodium hydroxide
e. Iodine
1039. According to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine, an analytical chemist determines quantitative content of potassium acetate by means of acidimetry in non-aqueous medium. Name the volumetric solution in this case:
a. Sodium hydroxide
b. Sodium nitrite
c. Potassium bromate
*d. Perchloric acid
e. Iodine
1040. According to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine, an analytical chemist should use acidimetry in non-aqueous medium to determine quantitative content of the following purine alkaloid:
*a. Caffeine
b. Theobromine
c. Theophylline ethylenediamine
d. Theophylline
e. Caffeine and sodium benzoate
1041. According to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine, an analytical chemist should use acidimetry in non-aqueous medium to determine quantitative content of the following purine alkaloid:
a. Caffeine and sodium benzoate
*b. Caffeine
c. Theophylline
d. Theophylline ethylenediamine
e. Theobromine
1042. According to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine, an analytical chemist should use acidimetry in non-aqueous medium to determine quantitative content of the following purine alkaloid:
a. Theobromine
b. Theophylline
c. Theophylline ethylenediamine
*d. Caffeine
e. Caffeine and sodium benzoate
1043. According to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine, cerimetry should be used to determine the quantitative content of paracetamol. What solution is used as a titrant in this case?
*a. Cerium sulfate
b. Potassium permanganate
c. Silver nitrate
d. Iodine monochloride
e. Hydrochloric acid
1044. According to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine, cerimetry should be used to determine the quantitative content of paracetamol. What solution is used as a titrant in this case?
a. Hydrochloric acid
b. Iodine monochloride
c. Silver nitrate
d. Potassium permanganate
*e. Cerium sulfate
1045. According to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine, cerimetry should be used to determine the quantitative content of paracetamol. What solution is used as a titrant in this case?
a. Potassium permanganate
b. Silver nitrate
c. Iodine monochloride
d. Hydrochloric acid
*e. Cerium sulfate
1046. According to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine, chemical identification of Atropa belladonna grass must be carried out using thin-layer chromatography. What substance is identified on a chromatographic plate after treatment with a reagent?
a. Arbutin
b. Gallic acid
c. Rutin
*d. Hyoscyamine
e. Vinblastine
1047. According to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine, chemical identification of Atropa belladonna grass must be carried out using thin-layer chromatography. What substance is identified on a chromatographic plate after treatment with a reagent?
a. Arbutin
b. Vinblastine
c. Gallic acid
d. Rutin
*e. Hyoscyamine
1048. According to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine, chemical identification of Atropa belladonna grass must be carried out using thin-layer chromatography. What substance is identified on a chromatographic plate after treatment with a reagent?
a. Vinblastine
b. Rutin
*c. Hyoscyamine
d. Gallic acid
e. Arbutin
1049. According to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine, phthalylsulfathiazole is quantitatively determined by means of alkalimetry in non-aqueous medium. The following substance is used as a solvent in this case:
*a. Dimethyl formamide
b. Benzene
c. Ethyl alcohol
d. Anhydrous acetic acid
e. Chloroform
1050. According to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine, phthalylsulfathiazole is quantitatively determined by means of alkalimetry in non-aqueous medium. The following substance is used as a solvent in this case:
a. Benzene
b. Ethyl alcohol
c. Anhydrous acetic acid
d. Chloroform
*e. Dimethyl formamide
1051. According to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine, phthalylsulfathiazole is quantitatively determined by means of alkalimetry in non-aqueous medium. The following substance is used as a solvent in this case:
a. Ethyl alcohol
b. Chloroform
c. Anhydrous acetic acid
*d. Dimethyl formamide
e. Benzene
1052. According to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine, the herbal raw material used in production of plantaglucide should be tested by means of thin-layer chromatography. The resulting chromatogram will have a weak blue zone, which will indicate the presence of:
a. Acteoside
*b. Aucubin
c. Acorone
d. Atropine
e. Azulene
1053. According to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine, the herbal raw material used in production of plantaglucide should be tested by means of thin-layer chromatography. The resulting chromatogram will have a weak blue zone, which will indicate the presence of:
a. Acteoside
b. Atropine
c. Acorone
d. Azulene
*e. Aucubin
1054. According to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine, the herbal raw material used in production of plantaglucide should be tested by means of thin-layer chromatography. The resulting chromatogram will have a weak blue zone, which will indicate the presence of:
a. Atropine
b. Acteoside
*c. Aucubin
d. Azulene
e. Acorone
1055. According to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine, the tablets taken internally can be classified into several different types. The pulsatile release tablets can be classified as:
*a. Modified-release tablets
b. Soluble tablets
c. Effervescent tablets
d. Dispersible tablets
e. Chewable tablets
1056. According to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine, the tablets taken internally can be classified into several different types. The pulsatile release tablets can be classified as:
a. Dispersible tablets
b. Effervescent tablets
c. Soluble tablets
*d. Modified-release tablets
e. Chewable tablets
1057. According to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine, the tablets taken internally can be classified into several different types. The pulsatile release tablets can be classified as:
a. Soluble tablets
b. Chewable tablets
c. Effervescent tablets
d. Dispersible tablets
*e. Modified-release tablets
1058. According to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine, to identify glucose solution for injections, its optical rotation angle should be measured. What chemophysical method is used in such cases?
*a. Polarimetry
b. Nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy
c. Infrared spectroscopy
d. Refractometry
e. Thin-layer chromatography
1059. According to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine, to identify glucose solution for injections, its optical rotation angle should be measured. What chemophysical method is used in such cases?
a. Thin-layer chromatography
*b. Polarimetry
c. Nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy
d. Infrared spectroscopy
e. Refractometry
1060. According to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine, to identify glucose solution for injections, its optical rotation angle should be measured. What chemophysical method is used in such cases?
a. Thin-layer chromatography
b. Infrared spectroscopy
c. Refractometry
d. Nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy
*e. Polarimetry
1061. According to the current Ukrainian legislation all drugs are divided into two categories: prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter). Which one of the listed drugs requires no prescription?
a. Ketamine, 5% infusion solution, 2 ml №10
*b. Ascorbic acid, 500 mg №30
c. Clonidine, ampoules, 1 ml of 0,01% solution №10
d. Tramadol, capsules, 0,05 №10
e. Phenobarbital, tablets, 100 mg №6
1062. According to the current Ukrainian legislation all drugs are divided into two categories: prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter). Which one of the listed drugs requires no prescription?
a. Phenobarbital, tablets, 100 mg №6
b. Ketamine, 5% infusion solution, 2 ml №10
c. Clonidine, ampoules, 1 ml of 0,01% solution №10
d. Tramadol, capsules, 0,05 №10
*e. Ascorbic acid, 500 mg №30
1063. According to the current Ukrainian legislation all drugs are divided into two categories: prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter). Which one of the listed drugs requires no prescription?
a. Tramadol, capsules, 0,05 №10
b. Phenobarbital, tablets, 100 mg №6
c. Clonidine, ampoules, 1 ml of 0,01% solution №10
*d. Ascorbic acid, 500 mg №30
e. Ketamine, 5% infusion solution, 2 ml №10
1064. According to the law regulating labour remuneration, the businesses must establish their compensation plan in the following document:
*a. Collective agreement
b. Statement
c. Job description
d. Contract of delivery
e. Decree
1065. According to the law regulating labour remuneration, the businesses must establish their compensation plan in the following document:
a. Decree
*b. Collective agreement
c. Statement
d. Job description
e. Contract of delivery
1066. According to the law regulating labour remuneration, the businesses must establish their compensation plan in the following document:
a. Statement
b. Job description
*c. Collective agreement
d. Contract of delivery
e. Decree
1067. According to the requirements of the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine, thin-layer chromatography is a mandatory method of identification of herbal raw materials. What zones must be detected on a chromatographic plate during the analysis of Digitalis purpurea herbal raw material?
a. Atropine and hyoscyamine
*b. Purpurea glycosides A and B
c. Convallatoxin
d. K-Strophanthin
e. Lanatosides A and B
1068. According to the requirements of the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine, thin-layer chromatography is a mandatory method of identification of herbal raw materials. What zones must be detected on a chromatographic plate during the analysis of Digitalis purpurea herbal raw material?
a. Atropine and hyoscyamine
b. K-Strophanthin
c. Lanatosides A and B
d. Convallatoxin
*e. Purpurea glycosides A and B
1069. According to the requirements of the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine, thin-layer chromatography is a mandatory method of identification of herbal raw materials. What zones must be detected on a chromatographic plate during the analysis of Digitalis purpurea herbal raw material?
a. K-Strophanthin
b. Lanatosides A and B
c. Convallatoxin
*d. Purpurea glycosides A and B
e. Atropine and hyoscyamine
1070. According to the rules in force, workrooms should regularly undergo humid disinfection. How often should the floors be washed?
a. No less than once in a week
*b. No less than once in a shift
c. No less than twice in a week
d. No less than thrice in a week
e. No less than twice in a month
1071. According to the rules in force, workrooms should regularly undergo humid disinfection. How often should the floors be washed?
a. No less than once in a week
b. No less than thrice in a week
c. No less than twice in a month
d. No less than twice in a week
*e. No less than once in a shift
1072. According to the rules in force, workrooms should regularly undergo humid disinfection. How often should the floors be washed?
a. No less than thrice in a week
*b. No less than once in a shift
c. No less than twice in a month
d. No less than once in a week
e. No less than twice in a week
1073. Accounting records are classified by the type of asset accounting or by their sources. Active accounts keep record of the following:
a. Bank loans
b. Debt settlement with the creditors
*c. Monetary funds
d. Salaries payment
e. Equity capital
1074. Accounting records are classified by the type of asset accounting or by their sources. Active accounts keep record of the following:
a. Debt settlement with the creditors
*b. Monetary funds
c. Salaries payment
d. Equity capital
e. Bank loans
1075. Accounting records are classified by the type of asset accounting or by their sources. Active accounts keep record of the following:
a. Salaries payment
b. Debt settlement with the creditors
c. Equity capital
*d. Monetary funds
e. Bank loans
1076. Accounts are classified based on the type of accounting of assets or the sources of their formation. What is accounted in passive accounts?
a. Accounts receivable
b. Monetary funds
*c. Authorized capital
d. Fixed assets
e. Goods
1077. Accounts are classified based on the type of accounting of assets or the sources of their formation. What is accounted in passive accounts?
a. Fixed assets
b. Goods
c. Accounts receivable
*d. Authorized capital
e. Monetary funds
1078. Accounts are classified based on the type of accounting of assets or the sources of their formation. What is accounted in passive accounts?
a. Monetary funds
b. Fixed assets
c. Goods
*d. Authorized capital
e. Accounts receivable
1079. Accounts receivable develop in the process of pharmaceutical company work. Specify where in the balance book they are recorded:
*a. Assets
b. Liabilities
c. Credit
d. Debit
e. Account
1080. Accounts receivable develop in the process of pharmaceutical company work. Specify where in the balance book they are recorded:
a. Credit
b. Liabilities
*c. Assets
d. Account
e. Debit
1081. Accounts receivable develop in the process of pharmaceutical company work. Specify where in the balance book they are recorded:
a. Liabilities
*b. Assets
c. Debit
d. Credit
e. Account
1082. Achillea grass is harvested during a certain stage of plant growth. Name this stage:
a. Before the flowering
b. During the shoot growth
c. During the fruiting
d. During the budding
*e. During mass flowering
1083. Achillea grass is harvested during a certain stage of plant growth. Name this stage:
a. During the fruiting
*b. During mass flowering
c. During the budding
d. During the shoot growth
e. Before the flowering
1084. Achillea grass is harvested during a certain stage of plant growth. Name this stage:
a. During the fruiting
*b. During mass flowering
c. During the shoot growth
d. During the budding
e. Before the flowering
1085. Acyclovir is a drug with the nucleoside structure, effective against herpes virus. What reaction of its transformation in the body is associated with its antiviral effect?
a. Hydrolysis
b. Hydroxylation
c. Oxidation
*d. Phosphorylation
e. Reduction
1086. Acyclovir is a drug with the nucleoside structure, effective against herpes virus. What reaction of its transformation in the body is associated with its antiviral effect?
a. Hydroxylation
b. Oxidation
c. Hydrolysis
d. Reduction
*e. Phosphorylation
1087. Acyclovir is a drug with the nucleoside structure, effective against herpes virus. What reaction of its transformation in the body is associated with its antiviral effect?
a. Oxidation
*b. Phosphorylation
c. Reduction
d. Hydroxylation
e. Hydrolysis
1088. Adhesive bandages have an effect on the skin, subcutaneous tissue, and in some cases on the entire body. What bandage is manufactured with the saponification reaction occurring in the process?
a. Adhesive bandage
b. Callus treatment bandage
c. Pepper plaster bandage
*d. Simple lead bandage
e. Bactericidal adhesive bandage
1089. Adhesive bandages have an effect on the skin, subcutaneous tissue, and in some cases on the entire body. What bandage is manufactured with the saponification reaction occurring in the process?
a. Callus treatment bandage
*b. Simple lead bandage
c. Bactericidal adhesive bandage
d. Adhesive bandage
e. Pepper plaster bandage
1090. Adhesive bandages have an effect on the skin, subcutaneous tissue, and in some cases on the entire body. What bandage is manufactured with the saponification reaction occurring in the process?
a. Callus treatment bandage
b. Adhesive bandage
c. Bactericidal adhesive bandage
d. Pepper plaster bandage
*e. Simple lead bandage
1091. Adonis-derived drugs are popular cardiotonic agents. The stock of adonis herbal raw material is assessed by the method of:
*a. Permanent quadrates
b. Projective cover
c. By eye
d. Geodesic
e. Model specimen
1092. Adonis-derived drugs are popular cardiotonic agents. The stock of adonis herbal raw material is assessed by the method of:
a. Model specimen
b. Geodesic
c. By eye
d. Projective cover
*e. Permanent quadrates
1093. Adonis-derived drugs are popular cardiotonic agents. The stock of adonis herbal raw material is assessed by the method of:
a. Model specimen
b. Geodesic
c. Projective cover
d. By eye
*e. Permanent quadrates
1094. Adrenergic drug adrenaline tartrate contains phenolic hydroxyls in its structure. What solution should be used to conduct a reaction for their detection?
*a. Iron (III) chloride solution
b. Magnesium sulfate solution
c. Copper (II) sulfate solution
d. Sodium nitrate solution
e. Potassium bromide solution
1095. Adrenergic drug adrenaline tartrate contains phenolic hydroxyls in its structure. What solution should be used to conduct a reaction for their detection?
*a. Iron (III) chloride solution
b. Sodium nitrate solution
c. Copper (II) sulfate solution
d. Magnesium sulfate solution
e. Potassium bromide solution
1096. Adrenergic drug adrenaline tartrate contains phenolic hydroxyls in its structure. What solution should be used to conduct a reaction for their detection?
a. Potassium bromide solution
b. Magnesium sulfate solution
c. Sodium nitrate solution
*d. Iron (III) chloride solution
e. Copper (II) sulfate solution
1097. Advertising is the most popular and widely used part of marketing communications system. What cannot be included into the advertisements for medicines?
a. Full pharmacological name of the medicine and the name of its manufacturer
b. Objective information about the medicines, presented in such a way that the advertising nature of the message is obvious to the consumers
*c. Claims that the effect of the medicines is guaranteed
d. Recommendation to always read the instructions for the medicines
e. General warnings about the usage of medicines and medical products
1098. Advertising is the most popular and widely used part of marketing communications system. What cannot be included into the advertisements for medicines?
a. Objective information about the medicines, presented in such a way that the advertising nature of the message is obvious to the consumers
b. Full pharmacological name of the medicine and the name of its manufacturer
*c. Claims that the effect of the medicines is guaranteed
d. General warnings about the usage of medicines and medical products
e. Recommendation to always read the instructions for the medicines
1099. Advertising is the most popular and widely used part of marketing communications system. What cannot be included into the advertisements for medicines?
a. Recommendation to always read the instructions for the medicines
b. General warnings about the usage of medicines and medical products
*c. Claims that the effect of the medicines is guaranteed
d. Full pharmacological name of the medicine and the name of its manufacturer
e. Objective information about the medicines, presented in such a way that the advertising nature of the message is obvious to the consumers
1100. Aesculus hippocastanum seeds as a herbal raw material can be standardized by their quantitative content of aescin that belongs to the following group of bioactive substances:
a. Coumarins
b. Flavonoids
c. Tannins
d. Anthracene derivatives
*e. Saponins
1101. Aesculus hippocastanum seeds as a herbal raw material can be standardized by their quantitative content of aescin that belongs to the following group of bioactive substances:
a. Coumarins
b. Tannins
c. Flavonoids
*d. Saponins
e. Anthracene derivatives
1102. Aesculus hippocastanum seeds as a herbal raw material can be standardized by their quantitative content of aescin that belongs to the following group of bioactive substances:
a. Flavonoids
*b. Saponins
c. Tannins
d. Coumarins
e. Anthracene derivatives
1103. After a surgery, a man was receiving promedol (trimeperidine) for a long time. When this drug was discontinued, the patient developed psychic and somatic disturbances. What phenomenon is it?
*a. Withdrawal syndrome
b. Tachyphylaxis
c. Steal syndrome
d. Idiosyncrasy
e. Rebound effect
1104. After a surgery, a man was receiving promedol (trimeperidine) for a long time. When this drug was discontinued, the patient developed psychic and somatic disturbances. What phenomenon is it?
a. Tachyphylaxis
*b. Withdrawal syndrome
c. Steal syndrome
d. Idiosyncrasy
e. Rebound effect
1105. After a surgery, a man was receiving promedol (trimeperidine) for a long time. When this drug was discontinued, the patient developed psychic and somatic disturbances. What phenomenon is it?
a. Tachyphylaxis
b. Rebound effect
*c. Withdrawal syndrome
d. Idiosyncrasy
e. Steal syndrome
1106. After lifting a load, a man developed sharp lumbar pain that intensifies during movements and radiates into the left leg. The patient was diagnosed with lumbosacral radiculopathy. What drug can be recommended in this case?
a. Atropine sulfate
b. Drotaverine hydrochloride
c. Enterosgel
*d. Diclofenac sodium
e. Cyanocobalamin
1107. After lifting a load, a man developed sharp lumbar pain that intensifies during movements and radiates into the left leg. The patient was diagnosed with lumbosacral radiculopathy. What drug can be recommended in this case?
a. Cyanocobalamin
b. Atropine sulfate
*c. Diclofenac sodium
d. Enterosgel
e. Drotaverine hydrochloride
1108. After lifting a load, a man developed sharp lumbar pain that intensifies during movements and radiates into the left leg. The patient was diagnosed with lumbosacral radiculopathy. What drug can be recommended in this case?
a. Cyanocobalamin
b. Atropine sulfate
c. Drotaverine hydrochloride
*d. Diclofenac sodium
e. Enterosgel
1109. After mineralization of bromocamphor with zinc dust, bromide-ions can be detected in the filtrate in the presence of CHCl_3 by performing a reaction with:
*a. Chloramine
b. Chloral hydrate
c. Acetyl chloride
d. Sodium chloride
e. Chloromethane
1110. After mineralization of bromocamphor with zinc dust, bromide-ions can be detected in the filtrate in the presence of CHCl_3 by performing a reaction with:
a. Chloromethane
b. Chloral hydrate
c. Sodium chloride
*d. Chloramine
e. Acetyl chloride
1111. After mineralization of bromocamphor with zinc dust, bromide-ions can be detected in the filtrate in the presence of CHCl_3 by performing a reaction with:
a. Sodium chloride
*b. Chloramine
c. Chloromethane
d. Acetyl chloride
e. Chloral hydrate
1112. After the start of a treatment, a tuberculosis patient has developed red coloration of urine, saliva, and lacrimal fluid. What drug could have caused such changes in this case?
*a. Rifampicin
b. Isoniazid
c. Benzylpenicillin (Penicillin G) sodium salt
d. Alcoholic iodine solution
e. Ciprofloxacin
1113. After the start of a treatment, a tuberculosis patient has developed red coloration of urine, saliva, and lacrimal fluid. What drug could have caused such changes in this case?
a. Benzylpenicillin (Penicillin G) sodium salt
*b. Rifampicin
c. Ciprofloxacin
d. Isoniazid
e. Alcoholic iodine solution
1114. After the start of a treatment, a tuberculosis patient has developed red coloration of urine, saliva, and lacrimal fluid. What drug could have caused such changes in this case?
a. Ciprofloxacin
b. Alcoholic iodine solution
c. Benzylpenicillin (Penicillin G) sodium salt
d. Isoniazid
*e. Rifampicin
1115. Agar-agar is used as a detoxifying absorbent and the basis of a nutrient medium for growing microorganisms. What class of bioactive substances does it belong to?
*a. Polysaccharides
b. Coumarins
c. Flavonoids
d. Vitamins
e. Iridoids
1116. Agar-agar is used as a detoxifying absorbent and the basis of a nutrient medium for growing microorganisms. What class of bioactive substances does it belong to?
a. Coumarins
b. Iridoids
c. Vitamins
d. Flavonoids
*e. Polysaccharides
1117. Agar-agar is used as a detoxifying absorbent and the basis of a nutrient medium for growing microorganisms. What class of bioactive substances does it belong to?
a. Iridoids
b. Vitamins
c. Flavonoids
*d. Polysaccharides
e. Coumarins
1118. Alkalimetry is used to determine the quantitative content of diphenhydramine hydrochloride antihistamine. What solution is used as a titrant in this analysis?
a. Hydrochloric acid solution
b. Potassium permanganate solution
*c. Sodium hydroxide solution
d. Sodium thiosulfate solution
e. Potassium bromate solution
1119. Alkalimetry is used to determine the quantitative content of diphenhydramine hydrochloride antihistamine. What solution is used as a titrant in this analysis?
a. Hydrochloric acid solution
b. Potassium permanganate solution
c. Sodium thiosulfate solution
d. Potassium bromate solution
*e. Sodium hydroxide solution
1120. Alkalimetry is used to determine the quantitative content of diphenhydramine hydrochloride antihistamine. What solution is used as a titrant in this analysis?
a. Potassium permanganate solution
b. Potassium bromate solution
*c. Sodium hydroxide solution
d. Sodium thiosulfate solution
e. Hydrochloric acid solution
1121. Alkaloids are used in medical practice for treatment of various diseases. Based on its chemical composition, the following substance can be classified as a quinolizidine alkaloid:
a. Caffeine monohydrate
b. Quinine sulfate
c. Scopolamine hydrobromide
*d. Pachycarpine hydroiodide
e. Codeine phosphate
1122. Alkaloids are used in medical practice for treatment of various diseases. Based on its chemical composition, the following substance can be classified as a quinolizidine alkaloid:
a. Scopolamine hydrobromide
*b. Pachycarpine hydroiodide
c. Codeine phosphate
d. Quinine sulfate
e. Caffeine monohydrate
1123. Alkaloids are used in medical practice for treatment of various diseases. Based on its chemical composition, the following substance can be classified as a quinolizidine alkaloid:
a. Scopolamine hydrobromide
b. Caffeine monohydrate
*c. Pachycarpine hydroiodide
d. Quinine sulfate
e. Codeine phosphate
1124. All business transactions at a pharmacy must be documented. What type of cash operation must be recorded with a receipt cash order?
a. Salary payments
*b. Revenue of the pharmacy
c. Advance salary payments
d. Transfer of the revenue to the bank account
e. Issuing cach sums to be accounted for
1125. All business transactions at a pharmacy must be documented. What type of cash operation must be recorded with a receipt cash order?
a. Salary payments
b. Advance salary payments
*c. Revenue of the pharmacy
d. Transfer of the revenue to the bank account
e. Issuing cach sums to be accounted for
1126. All business transactions at a pharmacy must be documented. What type of cash operation must be recorded with a receipt cash order?
a. Salary payments
b. Issuing cach sums to be accounted for
*c. Revenue of the pharmacy
d. Advance salary payments
e. Transfer of the revenue to the bank account
1127. All the values, traditions, behavioral norms, and views that are characteristic of the employees of a pharmaceutical company together form its:
a. -
b. Diversification
c. Integration
d. Etiquette
*e. Culture
1128. All the values, traditions, behavioral norms, and views that are characteristic of the employees of a pharmaceutical company together form its:
a. Diversification
b. Etiquette
c. Integration
*d. Culture
e. -
1129. All the values, traditions, behavioral norms, and views that are characteristic of the employees of a pharmaceutical company together form its:
a. Integration
*b. Culture
c. Etiquette
d. Diversification
e. -
1130. Althaea officinalis roots require special conditions for infusion. What special technique must be used for infusion of this herbal raw material?
a. Immediate filtration
b. The presence of ascorbic acid
c. The presence of hydrochloric acid
*d. Cold infusion
e. The presence of sodium bicarbonate
1131. Althaea officinalis roots require special conditions for infusion. What special technique must be used for infusion of this herbal raw material?
a. The presence of hydrochloric acid
b. Immediate filtration
c. The presence of sodium bicarbonate
*d. Cold infusion
e. The presence of ascorbic acid
1132. Althaea officinalis roots require special conditions for infusion. What special technique must be used for infusion of this herbal raw material?
a. The presence of sodium bicarbonate
b. The presence of ascorbic acid
c. The presence of hydrochloric acid
d. Immediate filtration
*e. Cold infusion
1133. Among various types of tablet external layers there are enterosoluble coatings. Where in the body are they dissolved?
a. Esophagus
b. Oral cavity
c. Rectum
*d. Intestine
e. Stomach
1134. Among various types of tablet external layers there are enterosoluble coatings. Where in the body are they dissolved?
a. Esophagus
b. Rectum
c. Oral cavity
d. Stomach
*e. Intestine
1135. Among various types of tablet external layers there are enterosoluble coatings. Where in the body are they dissolved?
a. Stomach
*b. Intestine
c. Rectum
d. Oral cavity
e. Esophagus
1136. Ampoule workshop of a factory produces 5% oil solution of tocopherol acetate for injections. What method of filling the ampoules is optimal in this case?
a. Syringe and devaporation
*b. Syringe
c. Syringe and vacuum
d. Devaporation
e. Vacuum
1137. Ampoule workshop of a factory produces 5% oil solution of tocopherol acetate for injections. What method of filling the ampoules is optimal in this case?
a. Vacuum
b. Syringe and devaporation
c. Syringe and vacuum
d. Devaporation
*e. Syringe
1138. An 18-year-old girl was hospitalized with complaints of polyuria, dry skin, loss of weight, and general weakness. She was diagnosed with diabetes mellitus type I, first diagnosed. What drug should be taken first in the course of the therapy?
a. Glibenclamid
b. Exenatide
*c. Insulin
d. Arphasetin
e. Metformin
1139. An 18-year-old girl was hospitalized with complaints of polyuria, dry skin, loss of weight, and general weakness. She was diagnosed with diabetes mellitus type I, first diagnosed. What drug should be taken first in the course of the therapy?
a. Metformin
*b. Insulin
c. Arphasetin
d. Glibenclamid
e. Exenatide
1140. An 18-year-old girl was hospitalized with complaints of polyuria, dry skin, loss of weight, and general weakness. She was diagnosed with diabetes mellitus type I, first diagnosed. What drug should be taken first in the course of the therapy?
a. Metformin
b. Exenatide
c. Arphasetin
d. Glibenclamid
*e. Insulin
1141. An accountable person has received a sum of money from the pharmacy cash desk to buy a calculator. What document records the cash flow in such a transaction?
*a. Cash expense order
b. Invoice
c. Remains unregistered documentarily
d. Cash income order
e. Receipt
1142. An accountable person has received a sum of money from the pharmacy cash desk to buy a calculator. What document records the cash flow in such a transaction?
a. Invoice
*b. Cash expense order
c. Cash income order
d. Receipt
e. Remains unregistered documentarily
1143. An accountable person has received a sum of money from the pharmacy cash desk to buy a calculator. What document records the cash flow in such a transaction?
a. Receipt
*b. Cash expense order
c. Invoice
d. Cash income order
e. Remains unregistered documentarily
1144. An accountant conducts necessary calculations for remuneration of labor. Name the type of remuneration that is due for labor carried out according to the work standards and is paid within the amount determined by basic or piece wages for factory workers and salaries for office workers:
a. Increment
*b. Basic pay
c. One-off payment
d. Bonus
e. Financial aid
1145. An accountant conducts necessary calculations for remuneration of labor. Name the type of remuneration that is due for labor carried out according to the work standards and is paid within the amount determined by basic or piece wages for factory workers and salaries for office workers:
a. Increment
b. Bonus
*c. Basic pay
d. Financial aid
e. One-off payment
1146. An accountant conducts necessary calculations for remuneration of labor. Name the type of remuneration that is due for labor carried out according to the work standards and is paid within the amount determined by basic or piece wages for factory workers and salaries for office workers:
a. One-off payment
b. Bonus
c. Increment
d. Financial aid
*e. Basic pay
1147. An alkaloid drug has the chemical name of 1,3,7-Trimethyl-3,7-dihydro-1H-purine-2,6-dione. Name this substance:
a. Norfloxacin
b. Ampicillin
c. Phenazone
*d. Caffeine
e. Chloramphenicol
1148. An alkaloid drug has the chemical name of 1,3,7-Trimethyl-3,7-dihydro-1H-purine-2,6-dione. Name this substance:
a. Phenazone
*b. Caffeine
c. Chloramphenicol
d. Norfloxacin
e. Ampicillin
1149. An alkaloid drug has the chemical name of 1,3,7-Trimethyl-3,7-dihydro-1H-purine-2,6-dione. Name this substance:
a. Phenazone
b. Ampicillin
*c. Caffeine
d. Chloramphenicol
e. Norfloxacin
1150. An analyst of a chemical laboratory had received a glucose substance for analysis. To check its quality he used a polarimeter. The analyst measured:
a. Melting point
b. Specific gravity
c. Optical density
d. Refractive index
*e. Angle of rotation
1151. An analyst of a chemical laboratory had received a glucose substance for analysis. To check its quality he used a polarimeter. The analyst measured:
a. Refractive index
b. Optical density
c. Melting point
*d. Angle of rotation
e. Specific gravity
1152. An analyst of a chemical laboratory had received a glucose substance for analysis. To check its quality he used a polarimeter. The analyst measured:
a. Specific gravity
*b. Angle of rotation
c. Refractive index
d. Melting point
e. Optical density
1153. An analytical chemist analyses the substance of racemic menthol according to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine. To identify the drug and determine its purity he uses optical rotation that should occur within the interval:
a. From +10^o  to +13^o
*b. From +0,2^o to –0,2^o
c. From +50^o to +56^o
d. From –102^o  to –105^o
e. From – 48^o  to –51^o
1154. An analytical chemist analyses the substance of racemic menthol according to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine. To identify the drug and determine its purity he uses optical rotation that should occur within the interval:
a. From –102^o  to –105^o
b. From +10^o  to +13^o
*c. From +0,2^o to –0,2^o
d. From – 48^o  to –51^o
e. From +50^o to +56^o
1155. An analytical chemist analyses the substance of racemic menthol according to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine. To identify the drug and determine its purity he uses optical rotation that should occur within the interval:
a. From –102^o  to –105^o
b. From +10^o  to +13^o
c. From – 48^o  to –51^o
d. From +50^o to +56^o
*e. From +0,2^o to –0,2^o
1156. An analytical chemist can quantitatively determine the thiamine bromide content in powders by means of:
*a. Alkalimetry
b. Bromometry
c. Complexometric titration
d. Permanganatometry
e. Nitritometric titration
1157. An analytical chemist can quantitatively determine the thiamine bromide content in powders by means of:
a. Nitritometric titration
*b. Alkalimetry
c. Permanganatometry
d. Bromometry
e. Complexometric titration
1158. An analytical chemist can quantitatively determine the thiamine bromide content in powders by means of:
a. Nitritometric titration
*b. Alkalimetry
c. Permanganatometry
d. Complexometric titration
e. Bromometry
1159. An analytical chemist conducts a thiochrome formation reaction to identify thiamine bromide. What reagent should be used in this case?
a. Iron(II) sulfate
*b. Potassium ferrocyanide
c. Sodium hydroxide
d. Calcium chloride
e. Potassium bromide
1160. An analytical chemist conducts a thiochrome formation reaction to identify thiamine bromide. What reagent should be used in this case?
a. Potassium bromide
b. Iron(II) sulfate
*c. Potassium ferrocyanide
d. Calcium chloride
e. Sodium hydroxide
1161. An analytical chemist conducts a thiochrome formation reaction to identify thiamine bromide. What reagent should be used in this case?
a. Sodium hydroxide
b. Calcium chloride
c. Iron(II) sulfate
*d. Potassium ferrocyanide
e. Potassium bromide
1162. An analytical chemist conducts quantitative determination of ibuprofen (substance) by means of direct alkalimetry. The following solution will be an indicator in this case:
*a. Phenolphthalein
b. Tropeolin 00
c. Mordant black
d. Ammonium iron (III) sulfate
e. Potassium chromate
1163. An analytical chemist conducts quantitative determination of ibuprofen (substance) by means of direct alkalimetry. The following solution will be an indicator in this case:
a. Ammonium iron (III) sulfate
b. Mordant black
c. Potassium chromate
*d. Phenolphthalein
e. Tropeolin 00
1164. An analytical chemist conducts quantitative determination of ibuprofen (substance) by means of direct alkalimetry. The following solution will be an indicator in this case:
a. Tropeolin 00
b. Mordant black
*c. Phenolphthalein
d. Potassium chromate
e. Ammonium iron (III) sulfate
1165. An analytical chemist determines potassium ions admixture in a medicinal substance with sodium tetraphenylborate according to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine. What analytical effect would confirm the presence of this admixture?
*a. White opalescence
b. Pink coloring
c. Yellow coloring
d. Brown coloring
e. Blue coloring
1166. An analytical chemist determines potassium ions admixture in a medicinal substance with sodium tetraphenylborate according to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine. What analytical effect would confirm the presence of this admixture?
a. Brown coloring
*b. White opalescence
c. Pink coloring
d. Yellow coloring
e. Blue coloring
1167. An analytical chemist determines potassium ions admixture in a medicinal substance with sodium tetraphenylborate according to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine. What analytical effect would confirm the presence of this admixture?
a. Yellow coloring
b. Blue coloring
c. Pink coloring
d. Brown coloring
*e. White opalescence
1168. An analytical chemist during the identification of phenylephrine hydrochloride (mesaton) performed a reaction with a solution of iron(III) chloride, which resulted in a purple coloring. The presence of what functional group in the structure of the drug was confirmed as a result?
*a. Phenolic hydroxyl
b. Aliphatic amino group
c. Primary aromatic amino group
d. Ester group
e. Carboxyl group
1169. An analytical chemist during the identification of phenylephrine hydrochloride (mesaton) performed a reaction with a solution of iron(III) chloride, which resulted in a purple coloring. The presence of what functional group in the structure of the drug was confirmed as a result?
a. Aliphatic amino group
b. Carboxyl group
c. Ester group
d. Primary aromatic amino group
*e. Phenolic hydroxyl
1170. An analytical chemist during the identification of phenylephrine hydrochloride (mesaton) performed a reaction with a solution of iron(III) chloride, which resulted in a purple coloring. The presence of what functional group in the structure of the drug was confirmed as a result?
a. Primary aromatic amino group
b. Carboxyl group
c. Aliphatic amino group
d. Ester group
*e. Phenolic hydroxyl
1171. An analytical chemist has conducted a qualitative reaction to confirm the presence of a steroid ring in the prednisolone molecule. For this purpose the following reagent was used:
*a. Concentrated sulfuric acid
b. Acetic anhydride
c. Copper tartrate reagent
d. Phenylhydrazine sulfate
e. Hydroxylamine hydrochloride
1172. An analytical chemist has conducted a qualitative reaction to confirm the presence of a steroid ring in the prednisolone molecule. For this purpose the following reagent was used:
a. Acetic anhydride
*b. Concentrated sulfuric acid
c. Phenylhydrazine sulfate
d. Copper tartrate reagent
e. Hydroxylamine hydrochloride
1173. An analytical chemist has conducted a qualitative reaction to confirm the presence of a steroid ring in the prednisolone molecule. For this purpose the following reagent was used:
a. Hydroxylamine hydrochloride
*b. Concentrated sulfuric acid
c. Acetic anhydride
d. Phenylhydrazine sulfate
e. Copper tartrate reagent
1174. An analytical chemist identifies diphenhydramine hydrochloride (Dimedrol). What reagent produces a bright yellow coloring when reacting with this substance?
*a. Concentrated sulfuric acid
b. Perchloric acid 0.1 M
c. Anhydrous acetic acid
d. Diluted phosphoric acid
e. Diluted hydrochloric acid
1175. An analytical chemist identifies diphenhydramine hydrochloride (Dimedrol). What reagent produces a bright yellow coloring when reacting with this substance?
*a. Concentrated sulfuric acid
b. Perchloric acid 0.1 M
c. Diluted hydrochloric acid
d. Anhydrous acetic acid
e. Diluted phosphoric acid
1176. An analytical chemist identifies diphenhydramine hydrochloride (Dimedrol). What reagent produces a bright yellow coloring when reacting with this substance?
a. Anhydrous acetic acid
b. Diluted hydrochloric acid
c. Diluted phosphoric acid
d. Perchloric acid 0.1 M
*e. Concentrated sulfuric acid
1177. An analytical chemist investigates a 3% hydrogen solution. What reagent is recommended by the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine for identification of this substance?
a. Magnesium sulfate
b. Sodium chloride
c. Zinc oxide
*d. Potassium chromate
e. Calcium chloride
1178. An analytical chemist investigates a 3% hydrogen solution. What reagent is recommended by the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine for identification of this substance?
a. Sodium chloride
b. Magnesium sulfate
c. Calcium chloride
d. Zinc oxide
*e. Potassium chromate
1179. An analytical chemist investigates a 3% hydrogen solution. What reagent is recommended by the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine for identification of this substance?
a. Zinc oxide
*b. Potassium chromate
c. Magnesium sulfate
d. Calcium chloride
e. Sodium chloride
1180. An analytical chemist performs collargol identification by means of ashing. Obtained residue is then dissolved in hydrochloric acid. Specify the analytical effect that is observed in this case:
*a. White precipitate
b. Yellow precipitate
c. Light green precipitate
d. Black precipitate
e. Blue precipitate
1181. An analytical chemist performs collargol identification by means of ashing. Obtained residue is then dissolved in hydrochloric acid. Specify the analytical effect that is observed in this case:
a. Black precipitate
*b. White precipitate
c. Blue precipitate
d. Light green precipitate
e. Yellow precipitate
1182. An analytical chemist performs collargol identification by means of ashing. Obtained residue is then dissolved in hydrochloric acid. Specify the analytical effect that is observed in this case:
a. Light green precipitate
*b. White precipitate
c. Blue precipitate
d. Black precipitate
e. Yellow precipitate
1183. An analytical chemist performs quantitative analysis of isoniazid by means of direct bromatometry with volumetric solutions of potassium bromate, potassium bromide, hydrochloric acid and methyl red as an indicator. This method is based on the following reaction:
a. Bromination of the pyridine ring
*b. Oxidation of the hydrazine group with bromine
c. Oxidation of the hydrazine residue with potassium bromide
d. Opening of the pyridine ring
e. Reduction of the hydrazine residue with bromine
1184. An analytical chemist performs quantitative analysis of isoniazid by means of direct bromatometry with volumetric solutions of potassium bromate, potassium bromide, hydrochloric acid and methyl red as an indicator. This method is based on the following reaction:
a. Bromination of the pyridine ring
b. Opening of the pyridine ring
c. Oxidation of the hydrazine residue with potassium bromide
d. Reduction of the hydrazine residue with bromine
*e. Oxidation of the hydrazine group with bromine
1185. An analytical chemist performs quantitative analysis of isoniazid by means of direct bromatometry with volumetric solutions of potassium bromate, potassium bromide, hydrochloric acid and methyl red as an indicator. This method is based on the following reaction:
a. Opening of the pyridine ring
b. Oxidation of the hydrazine residue with potassium bromide
*c. Oxidation of the hydrazine group with bromine
d. Bromination of the pyridine ring
e. Reduction of the hydrazine residue with bromine
1186. An analytical chemist performs the identification of ascorbic acid in an injection solution according to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine. Its interaction with a certain solution produces a gray precipitate. Name this solution:
*a. Silver nitrate
b. Calcium chloride
c. Ammonium hydroxide
d. Sodium carbonate
e. Sodium nitrite
1187. An analytical chemist performs the identification of ascorbic acid in an injection solution according to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine. Its interaction with a certain solution produces a gray precipitate. Name this solution:
*a. Silver nitrate
b. Sodium carbonate
c. Calcium chloride
d. Ammonium hydroxide
e. Sodium nitrite
1188. An analytical chemist performs the identification of ascorbic acid in an injection solution according to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine. Its interaction with a certain solution produces a gray precipitate. Name this solution:
a. Sodium nitrite
b. Sodium carbonate
*c. Silver nitrate
d. Calcium chloride
e. Ammonium hydroxide
1189. An analytical chemist performs the qualitative assessment of mercury (II) chloride. What method is recommended by the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine for quantitative assessment in this case?
*a. Complexometric titration
b. Nitritometric titration
c. Acidimetry
d. Bromometry
e. Alkalimetry
1190. An analytical chemist performs the qualitative assessment of mercury (II) chloride. What method is recommended by the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine for quantitative assessment in this case?
a. Acidimetry
b. Nitritometric titration
c. Bromometry
*d. Complexometric titration
e. Alkalimetry
1191. An analytical chemist performs the qualitative assessment of mercury (II) chloride. What method is recommended by the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine for quantitative assessment in this case?
a. Nitritometric titration
b. Bromometry
c. Alkalimetry
d. Acidimetry
*e. Complexometric titration
1192. An analytical chemist should use the following solution to identify sodium-containing substances:
*a. Potassium pyroantimonate
b. Potassium permanganate
c. Sodium citrate
d. Barium hydroxide
e. Potassium carbonate
1193. An analytical chemist should use the following solution to identify sodium-containing substances:
a. Barium hydroxide
*b. Potassium pyroantimonate
c. Potassium carbonate
d. Potassium permanganate
e. Sodium citrate
1194. An analytical chemist should use the following solution to identify sodium-containing substances:
a. Potassium permanganate
*b. Potassium pyroantimonate
c. Potassium carbonate
d. Sodium citrate
e. Barium hydroxide
1195. An analytical chemist studies an iodine substance. What volumetric solution is recommended by the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine for its quantitative determination?
*a. Sodium thiosulfate
b. Sodium edetate
c. Potassium bromate
d. Sodium hydroxide
e. Hydrochloric acid
1196. An analytical chemist studies an iodine substance. What volumetric solution is recommended by the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine for its quantitative determination?
a. Potassium bromate
*b. Sodium thiosulfate
c. Hydrochloric acid
d. Sodium hydroxide
e. Sodium edetate
1197. An analytical chemist studies an iodine substance. What volumetric solution is recommended by the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine for its quantitative determination?
a. Sodium hydroxide
b. Hydrochloric acid
c. Sodium edetate
*d. Sodium thiosulfate
e. Potassium bromate
1198. An analytical chemist uses nitritometry for quantitative determination of procainamide hydrochloride. What indicator is used in this case to determine the titration endpoint?
*a. Tropeolin 00
b. Methyl orange
c. Xylenol orange
d. Methyl red
e. Phenolphthalein
1199. An analytical chemist uses nitritometry for quantitative determination of procainamide hydrochloride. What indicator is used in this case to determine the titration endpoint?
a. Phenolphthalein
b. Methyl orange
c. Xylenol orange
*d. Tropeolin 00
e. Methyl red
1200. An analytical chemist uses nitritometry for quantitative determination of procainamide hydrochloride. What indicator is used in this case to determine the titration endpoint?
a. Xylenol orange
b. Methyl orange
c. Phenolphthalein
d. Methyl red
*e. Tropeolin 00
1201. An analytical laboratory has received a procaine hydrochloride substance for analysis. According to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine limit content of heavy metals should be determined with the following reagent:
*a. Thioacetamide
b. Sulfomolybdenum
c. Aminomethyl alizarin acetic acid
d. Methoxyphenylacetic acid
e. Hypophosphite
1202. An analytical laboratory has received a procaine hydrochloride substance for analysis. According to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine limit content of heavy metals should be determined with the following reagent:
*a. Thioacetamide
b. Sulfomolybdenum
c. Hypophosphite
d. Methoxyphenylacetic acid
e. Aminomethyl alizarin acetic acid
1203. An analytical laboratory has received a procaine hydrochloride substance for analysis. According to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine limit content of heavy metals should be determined with the following reagent:
a. Methoxyphenylacetic acid
b. Sulfomolybdenum
c. Hypophosphite
d. Aminomethyl alizarin acetic acid
*e. Thioacetamide
1204. An analytical pharmacist analyzes a cefazolin sodium substance. What solution is used for identification of sodium ions?
a. Ammonium oxalate solution
b. Magnesium sulfate solution
c. Barium chloride solution
*d. Potassium pyroantimonate solution
e. Sodium nitrite solution
1205. An analytical pharmacist analyzes a cefazolin sodium substance. What solution is used for identification of sodium ions?
a. Magnesium sulfate solution
b. Sodium nitrite solution
c. Barium chloride solution
d. Ammonium oxalate solution
*e. Potassium pyroantimonate solution
1206. An analytical pharmacist analyzes a cefazolin sodium substance. What solution is used for identification of sodium ions?
a. Sodium nitrite solution
*b. Potassium pyroantimonate solution
c. Barium chloride solution
d. Ammonium oxalate solution
e. Magnesium sulfate solution
1207. An analytical pharmacist analyzes a chloramphenicol (levomycetin) substance and uses the specific absorption parameter value to calculate its quantitative content. What method was used for quantification in this case?
a. Polarimetry
*b. Spectrophotometry
c. Polarography
d. Refractometry
e. Photocolorimetry
1208. An analytical pharmacist analyzes a chloramphenicol (levomycetin) substance and uses the specific absorption parameter value to calculate its quantitative content. What method was used for quantification in this case?
a. Polarography
*b. Spectrophotometry
c. Photocolorimetry
d. Polarimetry
e. Refractometry
1209. An analytical pharmacist analyzes a chloramphenicol (levomycetin) substance and uses the specific absorption parameter value to calculate its quantitative content. What method was used for quantification in this case?
a. Refractometry
*b. Spectrophotometry
c. Photocolorimetry
d. Polarography
e. Polarimetry
1210. An analytical pharmacist analyzes the antianginal agent glyceryl trinitrate (nitroglycerin). What solution would the pharmacist use to identify the nitrate ions that form after hydrolysis?
*a. Diphenylamine solution
b. Glyoxal-hydroxyanil solution
c. Lanthanum(III) nitrate solution
d. Thiourea solution
e. Chloramine solution
1211. An analytical pharmacist analyzes the antianginal agent glyceryl trinitrate (nitroglycerin). What solution would the pharmacist use to identify the nitrate ions that form after hydrolysis?
a. Chloramine solution
b. Lanthanum(III) nitrate solution
c. Glyoxal-hydroxyanil solution
d. Thiourea solution
*e. Diphenylamine solution
1212. An analytical pharmacist analyzes the antianginal agent glyceryl trinitrate (nitroglycerin). What solution would the pharmacist use to identify the nitrate ions that form after hydrolysis?
a. Thiourea solution
*b. Diphenylamine solution
c. Glyoxal-hydroxyanil solution
d. Lanthanum(III) nitrate solution
e. Chloramine solution
1213. An analytical pharmacist conducts a quantitative analysis of sodium benzoate and uses a hydrochloric acid solution as a titrant. What method of quantification is being used in this case?
*a. Acidimetry
b. Complexometry
c. Iodometry
d. Bromatometry
e. Nitritometry
1214. An analytical pharmacist conducts a quantitative analysis of sodium benzoate and uses a hydrochloric acid solution as a titrant. What method of quantification is being used in this case?
a. Bromatometry
*b. Acidimetry
c. Complexometry
d. Nitritometry
e. Iodometry
1215. An analytical pharmacist conducts a quantitative analysis of sodium benzoate and uses a hydrochloric acid solution as a titrant. What method of quantification is being used in this case?
a. Complexometry
b. Bromatometry
*c. Acidimetry
d. Iodometry
e. Nitritometry
1216. An analytical pharmacist detects a primary aromatic amino group in the structure of benzocaine (anesthesine). What compound would the pharmacist use for identification?
a. Indophenol
b. Murexide
c. Fluorescein
*d. Azo dye
e. Iodoform
1217. An analytical pharmacist is testing a thiamine hydrobromide substance. What solution would the pharmacist use to determine sulfate impurities?
a. Ammonium oxalate solution
*b. Barium chloride solution
c. Sodium benzoate solution
d. Sodium nitrite solution
e. Calcium chloride solution
1218. An analytical pharmacist is testing a thiamine hydrobromide substance. What solution would the pharmacist use to determine sulfate impurities?
a. Sodium benzoate solution
*b. Barium chloride solution
c. Ammonium oxalate solution
d. Sodium nitrite solution
e. Calcium chloride solution
1219. An analytical pharmacist is testing a thiamine hydrobromide substance. What solution would the pharmacist use to determine sulfate impurities?
a. Sodium benzoate solution
b. Sodium nitrite solution
c. Calcium chloride solution
*d. Barium chloride solution
e. Ammonium oxalate solution
1220. An analytical pharmacist of the quality control department analyzes the phenol substance. What method of quantification is used for this purpose?
*a. Bromatometry
b. Argentometry
c. Permanganatometry
d. Mercurimetry
e. Complexonometry
1221. An analytical pharmacist of the quality control department analyzes the phenol substance. What method of quantification is used for this purpose?
a. Mercurimetry
b. Argentometry
c. Permanganatometry
d. Complexonometry
*e. Bromatometry
1222. An analytical pharmacist of the quality control department analyzes the phenol substance. What method of quantification is used for this purpose?
a. Permanganatometry
b. Mercurimetry
*c. Bromatometry
d. Complexonometry
e. Argentometry
1223. An analytical pharmacist performs the express analysis of anti-inflammatory eye drops containing potassium iodide. What method is used for quantification of the active substance?
a. Acidimetry
*b. Argentometry
c. Alkalimetry
d. Nitritometry
e. Complexonometry
1224. An analytical pharmacist performs the express analysis of anti-inflammatory eye drops containing potassium iodide. What method is used for quantification of the active substance?
a. Alkalimetry
b. Nitritometry
*c. Argentometry
d. Complexonometry
e. Acidimetry
1225. An analytical pharmacist performs the express analysis of anti-inflammatory eye drops containing potassium iodide. What method is used for quantification of the active substance?
a. Nitritometry
b. Alkalimetry
c. Complexonometry
d. Acidimetry
*e. Argentometry
1226. An analytical pharmacist quantifies the ascorbic acid substance using the iodometric method. What indicator must be used in the process?
a. Methyl orange
*b. Starch
c. Murexide
d. Bromophenol blue
e. Phenolphthalein
1227. An analytical pharmacist quantifies the ascorbic acid substance using the iodometric method. What indicator must be used in the process?
a. Methyl orange
b. Phenolphthalein
c. Bromophenol blue
d. Murexide
*e. Starch
1228. An analytical pharmacist quantifies the ascorbic acid substance using the iodometric method. What indicator must be used in the process?
a. Murexide
b. Bromophenol blue
c. Methyl orange
d. Phenolphthalein
*e. Starch
1229. An analytical pharmacist uses a reaction with a sodium hydroxide solution during boiling to identify a nicotinamide substance. What gaseous product  is released as a result of this reaction?
*a. Ammonia
b. Carbon(IV) oxide
c. Hydrogen sulfide
d. Sulfur(VI) oxide
e. Formaldehyde
1230. An analytical pharmacist uses a reaction with a sodium hydroxide solution during boiling to identify a nicotinamide substance. What gaseous product  is released as a result of this reaction?
a. Formaldehyde
b. Carbon(IV) oxide
c. Hydrogen sulfide
*d. Ammonia
e. Sulfur(VI) oxide
1231. An analytical pharmacist uses a reaction with a sodium hydroxide solution during boiling to identify a nicotinamide substance. What gaseous product  is released as a result of this reaction?
a. Sulfur(VI) oxide
b. Carbon(IV) oxide
*c. Ammonia
d. Formaldehyde
e. Hydrogen sulfide
1232. An analytical pharmacist uses cerimetry for quantification of nifedipine. What indicator is used in this method?
*a. Ferroin
b. Potassium chromate
c. Tropeolin 00
d. Phenolphthalein
e. Methyl orange
1233. An analytical pharmacist uses cerimetry for quantification of nifedipine. What indicator is used in this method?
a. Methyl orange
b. Potassium chromate
*c. Ferroin
d. Tropeolin 00
e. Phenolphthalein
1234. An analytical pharmacist uses cerimetry for quantification of nifedipine. What indicator is used in this method?
a. Potassium chromate
b. Methyl orange
c. Tropeolin 00
*d. Ferroin
e. Phenolphthalein
1235. An analytical quality control laboratory analyzes a resorcinol substance. What method is used for its quantitative determination?
*a. Bromometry
b. Nitritometry
c. Argentometry
d. Complexometric titration
e. Mercurimetry
1236. An analytical quality control laboratory analyzes a resorcinol substance. What method is used for its quantitative determination?
a. Argentometry
b. Nitritometry
c. Mercurimetry
*d. Bromometry
e. Complexometric titration
1237. An analytical quality control laboratory analyzes a resorcinol substance. What method is used for its quantitative determination?
a. Complexometric titration
*b. Bromometry
c. Argentometry
d. Mercurimetry
e. Nitritometry
1238. An analytical quality control laboratory performs analysis of an ascorbic acid substance. What device must be used to determine its specific optical rotation?
*a. Polarimeter
b. Refractometer
c. Viscometer
d. Spectrophotometer
e. Hydrometer
1239. An analytical quality control laboratory performs analysis of an ascorbic acid substance. What device must be used to determine its specific optical rotation?
a. Hydrometer
b. Spectrophotometer
*c. Polarimeter
d. Viscometer
e. Refractometer
1240. An analytical quality control laboratory performs analysis of an ascorbic acid substance. What device must be used to determine its specific optical rotation?
a. Spectrophotometer
b. Refractometer
c. Viscometer
d. Hydrometer
*e. Polarimeter
1241. An employee of an analytical and quality control laboratory performs a rapid analysis of morphine hydrochloride. In this case, the presence of phenolic hydroxyl can be confirmed by a reaction with a solution of:
a. AgNO_3
b. NH_3
*c. FeСl_3
d. Concentrated HNO_3
e. K_3[FeСN)_6]
1242. An employee of an analytical and quality control laboratory performs a rapid analysis of morphine hydrochloride. In this case, the presence of phenolic hydroxyl can be confirmed by a reaction with a solution of:
a. Concentrated HNO_3
b. K_3[FeСN)_6]
c. NH_3
d. AgNO_3
*e. FeСl_3
1243. An employee of an analytical and quality control laboratory performs a rapid analysis of morphine hydrochloride. In this case, the presence of phenolic hydroxyl can be confirmed by a reaction with a solution of:
a. K_3[FeСN)_6]
b. NH_3
c. Concentrated HNO_3
*d. FeСl_3
e. AgNO_3
1244. An expert from an analytical quality control laboratory performs the quantitative determination of chlorpromazine in the tablets, according to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine. The expert uses the method of ultraviolet spectrophotometry and measures the following with the spectrophotometer:
*a. Optical density
b. Solution pH
c. Viscosity
d. Angle of rotation
e. Refractive index
1245. An expert from an analytical quality control laboratory performs the quantitative determination of chlorpromazine in the tablets, according to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine. The expert uses the method of ultraviolet spectrophotometry and measures the following with the spectrophotometer:
a. Angle of rotation
b. Refractive index
c. Solution pH
*d. Optical density
e. Viscosity
1246. An expert from an analytical quality control laboratory performs the quantitative determination of chlorpromazine in the tablets, according to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine. The expert uses the method of ultraviolet spectrophotometry and measures the following with the spectrophotometer:
a. Refractive index
b. Solution pH
*c. Optical density
d. Angle of rotation
e. Viscosity
1247. An important indicator of business activity is profitability of a business. Specify the indicators that can be used to measure the profitability:
*a. Profit/turnover
b. Liquidity/solvency
c. Turnover/production cost
d. Income/turnover
e. Turnover/income
1248. An important indicator of business activity is profitability of a business. Specify the indicators that can be used to measure the profitability:
*a. Profit/turnover
b. Turnover/income
c. Turnover/production cost
d. Income/turnover
e. Liquidity/solvency
1249. An important indicator of business activity is profitability of a business. Specify the indicators that can be used to measure the profitability:
a. Liquidity/solvency
b. Turnover/income
c. Turnover/production cost
*d. Profit/turnover
e. Income/turnover
1250. An infusion and a liquid extract used as cardiotonics are obtained from Crataegus oxyacantha flowers and fruits. What active substance that is a component of this herbal raw material can be determined using spectrophotometry?
a. Atropine
b. Cytisine
c. Lipids
d. Papaverine
*e. Flavonoids
1251. An infusion and a liquid extract used as cardiotonics are obtained from Crataegus oxyacantha flowers and fruits. What active substance that is a component of this herbal raw material can be determined using spectrophotometry?
a. Lipids
b. Papaverine
*c. Flavonoids
d. Atropine
e. Cytisine
1252. An infusion and a liquid extract used as cardiotonics are obtained from Crataegus oxyacantha flowers and fruits. What active substance that is a component of this herbal raw material can be determined using spectrophotometry?
a. Papaverine
b. Lipids
c. Atropine
*d. Flavonoids
e. Cytisine
1253. Analysis of sales volume of a certain drug shows that the drug is being manufactured in large batches and sales volume grows. However, the growth rate gradually slows down and the number of competitors increases. What stage of product life cycle is it?
a. Decline
b. Growth
c. Development
d. Introduction
*e. Maturity
1254. Analysis of sales volume of a certain drug shows that the drug is being manufactured in large batches and sales volume grows. However, the growth rate gradually slows down and the number of competitors increases. What stage of product life cycle is it?
a. Decline
b. Introduction
*c. Maturity
d. Development
e. Growth
1255. Analysis of sales volume of a certain drug shows that the drug is being manufactured in large batches and sales volume grows. However, the growth rate gradually slows down and the number of competitors increases. What stage of product life cycle is it?
a. Growth
b. Development
*c. Maturity
d. Introduction
e. Decline
1256. Analysis of work environment of a pharmaceutical company has detected there the following organizational features: dynamism, flexibility of management structure, self-checking, and democratic communication. What type of adaptive organization structure is it?
*a. Organic
b. Informal
c. Combined
d. -
e. Mechanistic
1257. Analysis of work environment of a pharmaceutical company has detected there the following organizational features: dynamism, flexibility of management structure, self-checking, and democratic communication. What type of adaptive organization structure is it?
a. Combined
b. -
*c. Organic
d. Informal
e. Mechanistic
1258. Analysis of work environment of a pharmaceutical company has detected there the following organizational features: dynamism, flexibility of management structure, self-checking, and democratic communication. What type of adaptive organization structure is it?
a. Informal
b. Combined
c. Mechanistic
d. -
*e. Organic
1259. Anthocyanidins are euflavonoid compounds that color plant tissues in shades that vary from pink to black-purple. What characteristic feature of anthocyanidins is used in their analysis?
a. Alcohol precipitation
*b. Ability to change color depending on the pH of the medium
c. Solubility in fats
d. Ability to sublime
e. Amorphous state
1260. Anthocyanidins are euflavonoid compounds that color plant tissues in shades that vary from pink to black-purple. What characteristic feature of anthocyanidins is used in their analysis?
a. Amorphous state
*b. Ability to change color depending on the pH of the medium
c. Alcohol precipitation
d. Ability to sublime
e. Solubility in fats
1261. Anthocyanidins are euflavonoid compounds that color plant tissues in shades that vary from pink to black-purple. What characteristic feature of anthocyanidins is used in their analysis?
a. Solubility in fats
b. Alcohol precipitation
*c. Ability to change color depending on the pH of the medium
d. Ability to sublime
e. Amorphous state
1262. Aqueous lanolin consists of:
a. 5 parts of anhydrous lanolin and 95 parts of water
b. 80 parts of anhydrous lanolin and 20 parts of water
*c. 70 parts of anhydrous lanolin and 30 parts of water
d. 90 parts of anhydrous lanolin and 10 parts of water
e. 50 parts of anhydrous lanolin and 50 parts of water
1263. Aqueous lanolin consists of:
a. 50 parts of anhydrous lanolin and 50 parts of water
b. 80 parts of anhydrous lanolin and 20 parts of water
c. 90 parts of anhydrous lanolin and 10 parts of water
*d. 70 parts of anhydrous lanolin and 30 parts of water
e. 5 parts of anhydrous lanolin and 95 parts of water
1264. Aqueous lanolin consists of:
a. 80 parts of anhydrous lanolin and 20 parts of water
b. 5 parts of anhydrous lanolin and 95 parts of water
c. 50 parts of anhydrous lanolin and 50 parts of water
d. 90 parts of anhydrous lanolin and 10 parts of water
*e. 70 parts of anhydrous lanolin and 30 parts of water
1265. Arctostaphylos leaves have uroseptic effect. The following is an allowable admixture to this herbal raw material:
*a. Folia Vitis idaeae
b. Folia Cotini coggygriae
c. Folia Urticae
d. Herba Bursae pastoris
e. Folia Digitalis lanata
1266. Arctostaphylos leaves have uroseptic effect. The following is an allowable admixture to this herbal raw material:
a. Folia Digitalis lanata
b. Herba Bursae pastoris
c. Folia Cotini coggygriae
d. Folia Urticae
*e. Folia Vitis idaeae
1267. Arctostaphylos leaves have uroseptic effect. The following is an allowable admixture to this herbal raw material:
a. Folia Urticae
b. Folia Cotini coggygriae
*c. Folia Vitis idaeae
d. Folia Digitalis lanata
e. Herba Bursae pastoris
1268. As a result of heparin overdose, a patient developed bleeding. What medicine must be used as an antidote in this case?
a. Naloxone
*b. Protamine sulfate
c. Thiosulfate
d. Unithiol (Dimercaptopropansulfonate sodium)
e. Methionine
1269. As a result of heparin overdose, a patient developed bleeding. What medicine must be used as an antidote in this case?
a. Naloxone
b. Unithiol (Dimercaptopropansulfonate sodium)
c. Methionine
*d. Protamine sulfate
e. Thiosulfate
1270. As a result of heparin overdose, a patient developed bleeding. What medicine must be used as an antidote in this case?
a. Thiosulfate
*b. Protamine sulfate
c. Methionine
d. Naloxone
e. Unithiol (Dimercaptopropansulfonate sodium)
1271. As the result of reduction of alcoholic solutions of 5-nitrofuran derivatives by means of their reaction with zinc in the presence of diluted hydrochloric acid, the following occurs:
a. Color change from yellow to black
*b. Solution decoloration
c. Ammonia production
d. Precipitation and gassing
e. Precipitation
1272. As the result of reduction of alcoholic solutions of 5-nitrofuran derivatives by means of their reaction with zinc in the presence of diluted hydrochloric acid, the following occurs:
a. Color change from yellow to black
b. Ammonia production
c. Precipitation and gassing
d. Precipitation
*e. Solution decoloration
1273. As the result of reduction of alcoholic solutions of 5-nitrofuran derivatives by means of their reaction with zinc in the presence of diluted hydrochloric acid, the following occurs:
a. Precipitation and gassing
b. Color change from yellow to black
c. Ammonia production
*d. Solution decoloration
e. Precipitation
1274. At a pharmacy, during the visual inspection, an authorized person has doubts about the quality of medicines. What measures should be taken in this case?
*a. Withdraw the medicines and send them for laboratory testing
b. Withdraw the medicines and send them back to the supplier
c. Withdraw the medicines and send them for disposal
d. Withdraw the medicines and send them back to the manufacturing factory
e. Withdraw the medicines and send them to the quality assurance department of the manufacturing company
1275. At a pharmacy, during the visual inspection, an authorized person has doubts about the quality of medicines. What measures should be taken in this case?
a. Withdraw the medicines and send them back to the manufacturing factory
*b. Withdraw the medicines and send them for laboratory testing
c. Withdraw the medicines and send them for disposal
d. Withdraw the medicines and send them back to the supplier
e. Withdraw the medicines and send them to the quality assurance department of the manufacturing company
1276. At a pharmacy, during the visual inspection, an authorized person has doubts about the quality of medicines. What measures should be taken in this case?
a. Withdraw the medicines and send them to the quality assurance department of the manufacturing company
b. Withdraw the medicines and send them back to the manufacturing factory
*c. Withdraw the medicines and send them for laboratory testing
d. Withdraw the medicines and send them for disposal
e. Withdraw the medicines and send them back to the supplier
1277. At a pharmacy, the pharmacist makes vaginal suppositories. What is the permissible range of the average weight of such suppositories?
a. 2.0-6.5 g
*b. 1.5-6.0 g
c. 3.0-7.0 g
d. 4.0-7.5 g
e. 1.0-4.0 g
1278. At a pharmacy, the pharmacist makes vaginal suppositories. What is the permissible range of the average weight of such suppositories?
a. 4.0-7.5 g
b. 3.0-7.0 g
*c. 1.5-6.0 g
d. 2.0-6.5 g
e. 1.0-4.0 g
1279. At a pharmacy, the pharmacist makes vaginal suppositories. What is the permissible range of the average weight of such suppositories?
a. 4.0-7.5 g
b. 3.0-7.0 g
c. 1.0-4.0 g
d. 2.0-6.5 g
*e. 1.5-6.0 g
1280. At the end of a working day, a cashier prepares the sales proceeds received in cash for the transfer to the bank account through a collecting agent. What document must be issued by the cashier for the cash transfer in this case?
*a. Payment summary
b. Payment order
c. Payment request and order
d. Cheque payable
e. Cash cheque
1281. At the end of a working day, a cashier prepares the sales proceeds received in cash for the transfer to the bank account through a collecting agent. What document must be issued by the cashier for the cash transfer in this case?
a. Cheque payable
b. Payment order
*c. Payment summary
d. Payment request and order
e. Cash cheque
1282. At the end of a working day, a cashier prepares the sales proceeds received in cash for the transfer to the bank account through a collecting agent. What document must be issued by the cashier for the cash transfer in this case?
a. Payment request and order
b. Cash cheque
*c. Payment summary
d. Payment order
e. Cheque payable
1283. At the end of each month a pharmacy accountant draws up a balance. What indicator characterizes liabilities of a pharmaceutical company?
a. Circulating assets
b. Accounts receivable
c. Reserves and expenses
*d. Equity capital
e. Work-in-process inventory
1284. At the end of each month a pharmacy accountant draws up a balance. What indicator characterizes liabilities of a pharmaceutical company?
a. Work-in-process inventory
*b. Equity capital
c. Circulating assets
d. Reserves and expenses
e. Accounts receivable
1285. At the end of each month a pharmacy accountant draws up a balance. What indicator characterizes liabilities of a pharmaceutical company?
a. Work-in-process inventory
b. Reserves and expenses
c. Accounts receivable
d. Circulating assets
*e. Equity capital
1286. At the exhibition, calendars, notebooks, and business gifts with the logo of a pharmaceutical company were handed out to the exhibition visitors for free. What is this type of advertising called?
*a. Souvenir advertising
b. Out-of-home advertising
c. Point-of-sale advertising
d. Film advertising
e. Print advertising
1287. At the exhibition, calendars, notebooks, and business gifts with the logo of a pharmaceutical company were handed out to the exhibition visitors for free. What is this type of advertising called?
*a. Souvenir advertising
b. Point-of-sale advertising
c. Film advertising
d. Print advertising
e. Out-of-home advertising
1288. At the exhibition, calendars, notebooks, and business gifts with the logo of a pharmaceutical company were handed out to the exhibition visitors for free. What is this type of advertising called?
a. Out-of-home advertising
*b. Souvenir advertising
c. Film advertising
d. Print advertising
e. Point-of-sale advertising
1289. At the laboratory of a pharmaceutical company, a corticosteroid medicinal substance - hydrocortisone acetate - is being analyzed. What cycle in its molecule causes the appearance of an intense bright yellow coloring, when concentrated sulfuric acid is added?
a. Pyridine cycle
b. Imidazole cycle
c. Naphthalene cycle
*d. Steroid cycle
e. Xanthine cycle
1290. At the laboratory of a pharmaceutical company, a corticosteroid medicinal substance - hydrocortisone acetate - is being analyzed. What cycle in its molecule causes the appearance of an intense bright yellow coloring, when concentrated sulfuric acid is added?
a. Pyridine cycle
b. Xanthine cycle
c. Imidazole cycle
*d. Steroid cycle
e. Naphthalene cycle
1291. At the laboratory of a pharmaceutical company, a corticosteroid medicinal substance - hydrocortisone acetate - is being analyzed. What cycle in its molecule causes the appearance of an intense bright yellow coloring, when concentrated sulfuric acid is added?
a. Xanthine cycle
b. Naphthalene cycle
c. Pyridine cycle
*d. Steroid cycle
e. Imidazole cycle
1292. At the laboratory of pharmacopoeial analysis, glutamic acid is being identified using the method of thin-layer chromatography. What reagent is used to develop a chromatogram?
*a. Ninhydrin
b. Aniline
c. Diphenylamine
d. Cyanogen bromide
e. Pyridine
1293. At the laboratory of pharmacopoeial analysis, glutamic acid is being identified using the method of thin-layer chromatography. What reagent is used to develop a chromatogram?
a. Cyanogen bromide
b. Diphenylamine
c. Aniline
d. Pyridine
*e. Ninhydrin
1294. At the laboratory of pharmacopoeial analysis, glutamic acid is being identified using the method of thin-layer chromatography. What reagent is used to develop a chromatogram?
a. Pyridine
b. Aniline
*c. Ninhydrin
d. Cyanogen bromide
e. Diphenylamine
1295. At the phytochemical workshop, percolation method is used to produce Crataegus tincture. What percolation rate is necessary for this purpose?
*a. 1/24 or 1/48 part of the percolator's  working volume per hour
b. 1/40 of the percolator's volume per hour
c. 1/20 of the percolator's volume per hour
d. 1/30 of the percolator's volume per 30 minutes
e. 1/10 of the percolator's volume per 20 minutes
1296. At the phytochemical workshop, percolation method is used to produce Crataegus tincture. What percolation rate is necessary for this purpose?
a. 1/20 of the percolator's volume per hour
b. 1/10 of the percolator's volume per 20 minutes
c. 1/30 of the percolator's volume per 30 minutes
*d. 1/24 or 1/48 part of the percolator's  working volume per hour
e. 1/40 of the percolator's volume per hour
1297. At the phytochemical workshop, percolation method is used to produce Crataegus tincture. What percolation rate is necessary for this purpose?
a. 1/30 of the percolator's volume per 30 minutes
b. 1/20 of the percolator's volume per hour
*c. 1/24 or 1/48 part of the percolator's  working volume per hour
d. 1/40 of the percolator's volume per hour
e. 1/10 of the percolator's volume per 20 minutes
1298. At what cost will protargol nasal drops be dispensed at a pharmacy if a pediatrician prescribes it for treatment of a 2-year-old child?
a. At full cost
*b. Free of charge
c. With 50% discount
d. With 30% discount
e. With 70% discount
1299. At what cost will protargol nasal drops be dispensed at a pharmacy if a pediatrician prescribes it for treatment of a 2-year-old child?
a. With 30% discount
b. With 70% discount
*c. Free of charge
d. At full cost
e. With 50% discount
1300. At what cost will protargol nasal drops be dispensed at a pharmacy if a pediatrician prescribes it for treatment of a 2-year-old child?
a. With 50% discount
b. With 30% discount
c. At full cost
d. With 70% discount
*e. Free of charge
1301. Atropa belladonna grass extract is a component of compound antispasmodic drugs. Select such drug from the list:
a. Herbogastrine
b. Urolesan
c. Olimetinum
d. Solutan
*e. Bellasthesin
1302. Atropa belladonna grass extract is a component of compound antispasmodic drugs. Select such drug from the list:
a. Olimetinum
*b. Bellasthesin
c. Solutan
d. Urolesan
e. Herbogastrine
1303. Atropa belladonna grass extract is a component of compound antispasmodic drugs. Select such drug from the list:
a. Olimetinum
*b. Bellasthesin
c. Urolesan
d. Herbogastrine
e. Solutan
1304. Audit of the macroenvironment of a pharmaceutical company has revealed a change in the number, density, and age structure of the population. What factors of the macroenvironment were studied?
*a. Socio-demographic
b. Technological
c. Political
d. Environmental and ecological
e. Economic
1305. Audit of the macroenvironment of a pharmaceutical company has revealed a change in the number, density, and age structure of the population. What factors of the macroenvironment were studied?
a. Environmental and ecological
*b. Socio-demographic
c. Technological
d. Political
e. Economic
1306. Audit of the macroenvironment of a pharmaceutical company has revealed a change in the number, density, and age structure of the population. What factors of the macroenvironment were studied?
a. Political
b. Economic
c. Technological
d. Environmental and ecological
*e. Socio-demographic
1307. Bank is a financial mediator in pharmacy's payments. Payment of taxes withheld from the employees' salary into the budget requires the following document:
*a. Payment order
b. Accounting form
c. Cash register receipt
d. Cash order
e. Check payable in account
1308. Bank is a financial mediator in pharmacy's payments. Payment of taxes withheld from the employees' salary into the budget requires the following document:
a. Check payable in account
b. Accounting form
c. Cash order
*d. Payment order
e. Cash register receipt
1309. Bank is a financial mediator in pharmacy's payments. Payment of taxes withheld from the employees' salary into the budget requires the following document:
a. Check payable in account
b. Cash order
c. Accounting form
*d. Payment order
e. Cash register receipt
1310. Based on the medical certificate, a patient can receive financial assistance due to temporary disability. Financial assistance for temporary disability textbfCANNOT be provided:
*a. In case of intentional self-harm
b. -
c. If sick leave is taken for child care
d. In case of disease (trauma)
e. If only sanatorium-and-spa treatment is required
1311. Based on the medical certificate, a patient can receive financial assistance due to temporary disability. Financial assistance for temporary disability textbfCANNOT be provided:
a. -
*b. In case of intentional self-harm
c. If only sanatorium-and-spa treatment is required
d. If sick leave is taken for child care
e. In case of disease (trauma)
1312. Based on the medical certificate, a patient can receive financial assistance due to temporary disability. Financial assistance for temporary disability textbfCANNOT be provided:
a. If sick leave is taken for child care
b. If only sanatorium-and-spa treatment is required
c. -
*d. In case of intentional self-harm
e. In case of disease (trauma)
1313. Based on the results of marketing research, the CEO of a pharmaceutical company and a team of marketologists have decided to take measures toward improvement of the competitive ability of the company's medical products. This kind of decision can be characterized as:
a. -
b. Autocratic
c. Personal
*d. Collegial
e. Intuitive
1314. Based on the results of marketing research, the CEO of a pharmaceutical company and a team of marketologists have decided to take measures toward improvement of the competitive ability of the company's medical products. This kind of decision can be characterized as:
a. Personal
b. -
c. Autocratic
d. Intuitive
*e. Collegial
1315. Based on the results of marketing research, the CEO of a pharmaceutical company and a team of marketologists have decided to take measures toward improvement of the competitive ability of the company's medical products. This kind of decision can be characterized as:
a. Personal
b. -
c. Intuitive
d. Autocratic
*e. Collegial
1316. Batches of several fatty oils were sent to the analytical quality control laboratory. One of the criteria for the study of fatty oils is determining their solubility. What oil is well soluble in ethyl alcohol?
*a. Castor oil
b. Sunflower oil
c. Cocoa butter
d. Flaxseed oil
e. Olive oil
1317. Batches of several fatty oils were sent to the analytical quality control laboratory. One of the criteria for the study of fatty oils is determining their solubility. What oil is well soluble in ethyl alcohol?
a. Cocoa butter
b. Sunflower oil
c. Olive oil
*d. Castor oil
e. Flaxseed oil
1318. Batches of several fatty oils were sent to the analytical quality control laboratory. One of the criteria for the study of fatty oils is determining their solubility. What oil is well soluble in ethyl alcohol?
a. Sunflower oil
b. Flaxseed oil
*c. Castor oil
d. Cocoa butter
e. Olive oil
1319. Because of a power outage, the cash register in a pharmacy has stopped working. What should be used to perform transactions, while the cash register remains inoperable?
*a. Transactions log book
b. Invoices
c. Cash deposit and cash withdrawal receipts
d. Payment orders
e. Payroll records
1320. Because of a power outage, the cash register in a pharmacy has stopped working. What should be used to perform transactions, while the cash register remains inoperable?
a. Cash deposit and cash withdrawal receipts
b. Invoices
c. Payment orders
d. Payroll records
*e. Transactions log book
1321. Because of a power outage, the cash register in a pharmacy has stopped working. What should be used to perform transactions, while the cash register remains inoperable?
a. Payment orders
b. Payroll records
c. Cash deposit and cash withdrawal receipts
*d. Transactions log book
e. Invoices
1322. Because of dissatisfaction with working conditions, a dispensing chemist has resigned of his own free will from the pharmacy and found a job as a medical representative of a pharmaceutical company. Such movement of the personnel corresponds with the following concept:
*a. Staff turnover
b. Recruitment
c. -
d. Staff rotation
e. Promotion
1323. Because of dissatisfaction with working conditions, a dispensing chemist has resigned of his own free will from the pharmacy and found a job as a medical representative of a pharmaceutical company. Such movement of the personnel corresponds with the following concept:
*a. Staff turnover
b. Staff rotation
c. -
d. Promotion
e. Recruitment
1324. Because of dissatisfaction with working conditions, a dispensing chemist has resigned of his own free will from the pharmacy and found a job as a medical representative of a pharmaceutical company. Such movement of the personnel corresponds with the following concept:
a. Promotion
b. Recruitment
c. -
*d. Staff turnover
e. Staff rotation
1325. Benzocaine is a substance with local anesthetic activity. According to its chemical structure, it is a derivative of:
a. n-Aminobenzene sulfonic acid
b. n-Aminosalicylic acid
c. n-Chlorobenzoic acid
d. n-Aminophthalic acid
*e. n-Aminobenzoic acid
1326. Benzocaine is a substance with local anesthetic activity. According to its chemical structure, it is a derivative of:
a. n-Aminosalicylic acid
*b. n-Aminobenzoic acid
c. n-Aminobenzene sulfonic acid
d. n-Chlorobenzoic acid
e. n-Aminophthalic acid
1327. Benzocaine is a substance with local anesthetic activity. According to its chemical structure, it is a derivative of:
a. n-Chlorobenzoic acid
b. n-Aminophthalic acid
c. n-Aminobenzene sulfonic acid
d. n-Aminosalicylic acid
*e. n-Aminobenzoic acid
1328. Benzoic acid is known to have antiseptic properties. To identify this acid the following should be used:
a. KMnO_4
b. K_2CrO_4
c. K_2[HgI_4]
*d. FeCl_3
e. [NH_4]_2C_2O_4
1329. Benzoic acid is known to have antiseptic properties. To identify this acid the following should be used:
a. K_2CrO_4
b. K_2[HgI_4]
*c. FeCl_3
d. KMnO_4
e. [NH_4]_2C_2O_4
1330. Benzoic acid is known to have antiseptic properties. To identify this acid the following should be used:
a. K_2[HgI_4]
b. [NH_4]_2C_2O_4
c. K_2CrO_4
d. KMnO_4
*e. FeCl_3
1331. Berberis vulgaris herbal raw material is a source of medicinal substances with cholagogic and hemostatic effect. What parts of this plant are harvested as a herbal raw material?
a. Leaves and fruits
*b. Roots and leaves
c. Roots and fruits
d. Leaves and seeds
e. Leaves and flowers
1332. Berberis vulgaris herbal raw material is a source of medicinal substances with cholagogic and hemostatic effect. What parts of this plant are harvested as a herbal raw material?
a. Leaves and fruits
b. Roots and fruits
c. Leaves and seeds
d. Leaves and flowers
*e. Roots and leaves
1333. Berberis vulgaris herbal raw material is a source of medicinal substances with cholagogic and hemostatic effect. What parts of this plant are harvested as a herbal raw material?
a. Leaves and seeds
b. Leaves and fruits
c. Roots and fruits
d. Leaves and flowers
*e. Roots and leaves
1334. Bilitrast is an X-ray contrast substance. What reagent can confirm the presence of phenolic hydroxyl in its molecule?
*a. Iron(III) chloride solution
b. Silver nitrate solution
c. Alcoholic iodine solution
d. Iodine dissolved in potassium iodide
e. Hydrochloric acid solution
1335. Bilitrast is an X-ray contrast substance. What reagent can confirm the presence of phenolic hydroxyl in its molecule?
a. Silver nitrate solution
*b. Iron(III) chloride solution
c. Iodine dissolved in potassium iodide
d. Hydrochloric acid solution
e. Alcoholic iodine solution
1336. Bilitrast is an X-ray contrast substance. What reagent can confirm the presence of phenolic hydroxyl in its molecule?
a. Silver nitrate solution
b. Iodine dissolved in potassium iodide
c. Alcoholic iodine solution
d. Hydrochloric acid solution
*e. Iron(III) chloride solution
1337. Bioactive substances of this plant have secretolytic, antispasmodic, antiflatulent, and slight diuretic effect. Its essential oil is used in making of gripe water. What plant is it?
a. Betula pendula
b. Calendula officinalis
c. Crataegus sanguіnea
d. Tanacetum vulgare
*e. Foeniculum vulgare
1338. Bioactive substances of this plant have secretolytic, antispasmodic, antiflatulent, and slight diuretic effect. Its essential oil is used in making of gripe water. What plant is it?
a. Calendula officinalis
b. Crataegus sanguіnea
c. Betula pendula
d. Tanacetum vulgare
*e. Foeniculum vulgare
1339. Bioactive substances of this plant have secretolytic, antispasmodic, antiflatulent, and slight diuretic effect. Its essential oil is used in making of gripe water. What plant is it?
a. Tanacetum vulgare
b. Betula pendula
*c. Foeniculum vulgare
d. Calendula officinalis
e. Crataegus sanguіnea
1340. Birch buds are used as a diuretic. Quality of the herbal raw material is determined by its content of:
a. Lipids
*b. Essential oil
c. Saponins
d. Iridoids
e. Vitamins
1341. Birch buds are used as a diuretic. Quality of the herbal raw material is determined by its content of:
a. Saponins
*b. Essential oil
c. Lipids
d. Iridoids
e. Vitamins
1342. Birch buds are used as a diuretic. Quality of the herbal raw material is determined by its content of:
a. Vitamins
b. Saponins
c. Iridoids
*d. Essential oil
e. Lipids
1343. Brassica juncea seeds are the raw material for the production of drugs with a distracting and warming effect. What class of bioactive substances causes such effect of the drugs?
*a. Thioglycosides
b. Alkaloids
c. Flavonoids
d. Fatty oil
e. Polysaccharides
1344. Brassica juncea seeds are the raw material for the production of drugs with a distracting and warming effect. What class of bioactive substances causes such effect of the drugs?
*a. Thioglycosides
b. Polysaccharides
c. Flavonoids
d. Fatty oil
e. Alkaloids
1345. Brassica juncea seeds are the raw material for the production of drugs with a distracting and warming effect. What class of bioactive substances causes such effect of the drugs?
a. Flavonoids
b. Fatty oil
c. Polysaccharides
d. Alkaloids
*e. Thioglycosides
1346. Bromatometry allows quantitative analysis of the following drug:
*a. Sodium salicylate
b. Potassium acetate
c. Glutamic acid
d. Benzoic acid
e. beta-Alanine
1347. Bromatometry allows quantitative analysis of the following drug:
a. Benzoic acid
b. Potassium acetate
c. beta-Alanine
*d. Sodium salicylate
e. Glutamic acid
1348. Bromatometry allows quantitative analysis of the following drug:
a. Glutamic acid
b. Potassium acetate
c. beta-Alanine
d. Benzoic acid
*e. Sodium salicylate
1349. Buckthorn bark and its derivative drugs are used as laxatives in medicine. According to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine during chromatographic identification of buckthorn bark it is necessary to detect:
*a. Glucofrangulins
b. Lanatosides
c. Panaxosides
d. Purpurea glycosides
e. Ginkgosides
1350. Buckthorn bark and its derivative drugs are used as laxatives in medicine. According to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine during chromatographic identification of buckthorn bark it is necessary to detect:
a. Panaxosides
*b. Glucofrangulins
c. Ginkgosides
d. Lanatosides
e. Purpurea glycosides
1351. Buckthorn bark and its derivative drugs are used as laxatives in medicine. According to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine during chromatographic identification of buckthorn bark it is necessary to detect:
a. Purpurea glycosides
b. Panaxosides
c. Lanatosides
*d. Glucofrangulins
e. Ginkgosides
1352. Buckthorn bark is used as a laxative. This herbal raw material colors red if an alkaline solution is added, which indicates the presence of the following substances:
a. Alkaloids
*b. Anthracene derivatives
c. Flavonoids
d. Vitamins
e. Tannins
1353. Buckthorn bark is used as a laxative. This herbal raw material colors red if an alkaline solution is added, which indicates the presence of the following substances:
a. Tannins
b. Flavonoids
c. Vitamins
*d. Anthracene derivatives
e. Alkaloids
1354. Buckthorn bark is used as a laxative. This herbal raw material colors red if an alkaline solution is added, which indicates the presence of the following substances:
a. Vitamins
b. Tannins
*c. Anthracene derivatives
d. Alkaloids
e. Flavonoids
1355. Calcium gluconate is being tested for presence of admixtures  of saccharose and reducing sugars with copper-tartrate reagent. If these admixtures are present the substance colors:
*a. Red
b. Blue
c. Green
d. Turquoise
e. White
1356. Calcium gluconate is being tested for presence of admixtures  of saccharose and reducing sugars with copper-tartrate reagent. If these admixtures are present the substance colors:
*a. Red
b. White
c. Green
d. Turquoise
e. Blue
1357. Calcium gluconate is being tested for presence of admixtures  of saccharose and reducing sugars with copper-tartrate reagent. If these admixtures are present the substance colors:
a. Turquoise
b. White
c. Green
d. Blue
*e. Red
1358. Calendula Ointment is placed on the shelf next to Dr. Theiss Calendula Ointment. What approach to the shelf layout is used in this pharmacy?
a. By package size
b. Corporate block layout
c. Seasonality
*d. Among competitors
e. Doubling product facings
1359. Calendula Ointment is placed on the shelf next to Dr. Theiss Calendula Ointment. What approach to the shelf layout is used in this pharmacy?
a. Corporate block layout
b. By package size
c. Seasonality
*d. Among competitors
e. Doubling product facings
1360. Calendula Ointment is placed on the shelf next to Dr. Theiss Calendula Ointment. What approach to the shelf layout is used in this pharmacy?
a. Seasonality
b. By package size
c. Corporate block layout
*d. Among competitors
e. Doubling product facings
1361. Camomile flowers are a popular medicinal substance in scientific medicine. What plant is the source of this herbal raw material?
a. Anthemis arvensis
b. Leucanthemum vulgare
c. Anthemis cotula
*d. Chamomilla recutita
e. Tripleurospermum inodorum
1362. Camomile flowers are a popular medicinal substance in scientific medicine. What plant is the source of this herbal raw material?
a. Leucanthemum vulgare
b. Tripleurospermum inodorum
*c. Chamomilla recutita
d. Anthemis arvensis
e. Anthemis cotula
1363. Capsaicin is the main active substance of Сapsiсum annuum. It belongs to the following class of bioactive substances:
a. Flavonoids
*b. Alkaloids
c. Iridoids
d. Anthracene derivatives
e. Phenolic compounds
1364. Capsaicin is the main active substance of Сapsiсum annuum. It belongs to the following class of bioactive substances:
a. Flavonoids
b. Anthracene derivatives
*c. Alkaloids
d. Iridoids
e. Phenolic compounds
1365. Capsaicin is the main active substance of Сapsiсum annuum. It belongs to the following class of bioactive substances:
a. Iridoids
b. Anthracene derivatives
*c. Alkaloids
d. Phenolic compounds
e. Flavonoids
1366. Cash can be withdrawn from the organisation's funds on the basis of a withdrawal receipt. What transaction requires a withdrawal receipt?
*a. Payment for the goods purchased for the household needs
b. Receipt of the proceeds from sales
c. Coverage of the shortages revealed during the stock-taking
d. Receipt of the funds for salary payment
e. Return of unused accountable funds
1367. Cash can be withdrawn from the organisation's funds on the basis of a withdrawal receipt. What transaction requires a withdrawal receipt?
*a. Payment for the goods purchased for the household needs
b. Receipt of the proceeds from sales
c. Coverage of the shortages revealed during the stock-taking
d. Return of unused accountable funds
e. Receipt of the funds for salary payment
1368. Cash can be withdrawn from the organisation's funds on the basis of a withdrawal receipt. What transaction requires a withdrawal receipt?
a. Receipt of the proceeds from sales
*b. Payment for the goods purchased for the household needs
c. Return of unused accountable funds
d. Receipt of the funds for salary payment
e. Coverage of the shortages revealed during the stock-taking
1369. Centaurium erythraea grass increases appetite and is a component of herbal teas for stomach. What active substance causes this effect of the herbal raw material?
*a. Iridoids
b. Simple phenols
c. Flavonoids
d. Saponins
e. Alkaloids
1370. Centaurium erythraea grass increases appetite and is a component of herbal teas for stomach. What active substance causes this effect of the herbal raw material?
*a. Iridoids
b. Simple phenols
c. Saponins
d. Alkaloids
e. Flavonoids
1371. Centaurium erythraea grass increases appetite and is a component of herbal teas for stomach. What active substance causes this effect of the herbal raw material?
a. Simple phenols
*b. Iridoids
c. Alkaloids
d. Flavonoids
e. Saponins
1372. Chemical analysis of Helichrysum flowers shows positive results of the cyanidin test. This reaction indicates the presence of the following class of compounds:
a. Polysaccharides
*b. Flavonoids
c. Alkaloids
d. Coumarins
e. Saponins
1373. Chemical analysis of Helichrysum flowers shows positive results of the cyanidin test. This reaction indicates the presence of the following class of compounds:
a. Polysaccharides
*b. Flavonoids
c. Coumarins
d. Saponins
e. Alkaloids
1374. Chemical analysis of Helichrysum flowers shows positive results of the cyanidin test. This reaction indicates the presence of the following class of compounds:
a. Polysaccharides
*b. Flavonoids
c. Saponins
d. Coumarins
e. Alkaloids
1375. Chloride of lime is identified by calcium cations after boiling with acetic acid in order to eliminate active chlorine. What reagent is used?
*a. Ammonium oxalate
b. Ammonium molybdate
c. Potassium chloride
d. Magnesium sulfate
e. Sodium nitrite
1376. Chloride of lime is identified by calcium cations after boiling with acetic acid in order to eliminate active chlorine. What reagent is used?
a. Ammonium molybdate
b. Sodium nitrite
c. Magnesium sulfate
d. Potassium chloride
*e. Ammonium oxalate
1377. Chloride of lime is identified by calcium cations after boiling with acetic acid in order to eliminate active chlorine. What reagent is used?
a. Magnesium sulfate
b. Ammonium molybdate
c. Sodium nitrite
*d. Ammonium oxalate
e. Potassium chloride
1378. Choose the solvent necessary to prepare concentrated solution of sodium bicarbonate in a pharmacy:
a. Chloroform
*b. Purified water
c. Peach-kernel oil
d. Vaseline
e. Ethanol
1379. Choose the solvent necessary to prepare concentrated solution of sodium bicarbonate in a pharmacy:
a. Ethanol
b. Peach-kernel oil
c. Chloroform
d. Vaseline
*e. Purified water
1380. Choose the solvent necessary to prepare concentrated solution of sodium bicarbonate in a pharmacy:
a. Vaseline
*b. Purified water
c. Peach-kernel oil
d. Ethanol
e. Chloroform
1381. Chromatographic methods are used in pharmaceutical analysis. What type of chromatography is based on reversible chemisorption of the ions of the analyte solution by the ionogenic groups of the sorbent?
a. Gas chromatography
*b. Ion-exchange chromatography
c. Thin layer chromatography
d. Adsorption chromatography
e. Paper chromatography
1382. Chromatographic methods are used in pharmaceutical analysis. What type of chromatography is based on reversible chemisorption of the ions of the analyte solution by the ionogenic groups of the sorbent?
a. Paper chromatography
b. Gas chromatography
c. Thin layer chromatography
d. Adsorption chromatography
*e. Ion-exchange chromatography
1383. Chromatographic methods are used in pharmaceutical analysis. What type of chromatography is based on reversible chemisorption of the ions of the analyte solution by the ionogenic groups of the sorbent?
a. Thin layer chromatography
b. Adsorption chromatography
c. Gas chromatography
*d. Ion-exchange chromatography
e. Paper chromatography
1384. Clonidine hydrochloride is a salt of an organic base. What method is used for the quantification of this medicinal substance?
*a. Alkalimetry
b. Bromatometry
c. Nitritometry
d. Iodometry
e. Complexonometry
1385. Clonidine hydrochloride is a salt of an organic base. What method is used for the quantification of this medicinal substance?
a. Complexonometry
b. Bromatometry
*c. Alkalimetry
d. Nitritometry
e. Iodometry
1386. Clonidine hydrochloride is a salt of an organic base. What method is used for the quantification of this medicinal substance?
a. Nitritometry
b. Bromatometry
*c. Alkalimetry
d. Complexonometry
e. Iodometry
1387. Codeine is used as a cough-depressant. What herbal raw material contains this alkaloid?
*a. Pods of opium poppy
b. Celandine grass
c. Grass of common periwinkle
d. Grass of plume poppy
e. Tea leaves
1388. Codeine is used as a cough-depressant. What herbal raw material contains this alkaloid?
a. Grass of plume poppy
b. Grass of common periwinkle
*c. Pods of opium poppy
d. Celandine grass
e. Tea leaves
1389. Codeine is used as a cough-depressant. What herbal raw material contains this alkaloid?
a. Grass of plume poppy
b. Grass of common periwinkle
c. Celandine grass
*d. Pods of opium poppy
e. Tea leaves
1390. Collective labour agreement is concluded by a trade union committee with the business owner on behalf of the workforce. Any collective agreement is worked out in written form. Which article of the Labour Code regulates the duration of the collective agreement?
*a. 17
b. 36
c. 41
d. 40
e. 38
1391. Collective labour agreement is concluded by a trade union committee with the business owner on behalf of the workforce. Any collective agreement is worked out in written form. Which article of the Labour Code regulates the duration of the collective agreement?
a. 36
b. 38
c. 40
d. 41
*e. 17
1392. Collective labour agreement is concluded by a trade union committee with the business owner on behalf of the workforce. Any collective agreement is worked out in written form. Which article of the Labour Code regulates the duration of the collective agreement?
a. 38
b. 40
c. 36
*d. 17
e. 41
1393. Commercial and financial activity of a pharmacy involves using returnable tare. Which of the following containers are returned to the supplier?
*a. Metal cylinders
b. Glass-stoppered bottles
c. Paper boxes
d. Packaging materials
e. Glassware
1394. Commercial and financial activity of a pharmacy involves using returnable tare. Which of the following containers are returned to the supplier?
a. Glassware
*b. Metal cylinders
c. Packaging materials
d. Paper boxes
e. Glass-stoppered bottles
1395. Commercial and financial activity of a pharmacy involves using returnable tare. Which of the following containers are returned to the supplier?
a. Packaging materials
*b. Metal cylinders
c. Paper boxes
d. Glassware
e. Glass-stoppered bottles
1396. Commercial and financial activity of the pharmacies can be measured using a system of parameters. What parameter can be described as the sum of sold goods per employee (taking the average number of employees during the analyzed period)?
*a. Labor productivity
b. Stock of goods
c. Turnover
d. Profitability
e. Price index
1397. Commercial and financial activity of the pharmacies can be measured using a system of parameters. What parameter can be described as the sum of sold goods per employee (taking the average number of employees during the analyzed period)?
a. Price index
b. Profitability
c. Turnover
*d. Labor productivity
e. Stock of goods
1398. Commercial and financial activity of the pharmacies can be measured using a system of parameters. What parameter can be described as the sum of sold goods per employee (taking the average number of employees during the analyzed period)?
a. Profitability
b. Price index
c. Stock of goods
*d. Labor productivity
e. Turnover
1399. Companies draw up their balance sheets to obtain information about the availability and composition of their property. What section of the balance sheet includes accounts receivable for goods?
*a. Assets
b. Equity capital
c. Current liabilities
d. Long-term liabilities
e. Non-current assets
1400. Companies draw up their balance sheets to obtain information about the availability and composition of their property. What section of the balance sheet includes accounts receivable for goods?
*a. Assets
b. Long-term liabilities
c. Equity capital
d. Current liabilities
e. Non-current assets
1401. Companies draw up their balance sheets to obtain information about the availability and composition of their property. What section of the balance sheet includes accounts receivable for goods?
a. Long-term liabilities
b. Non-current assets
*c. Assets
d. Current liabilities
e. Equity capital
1402. Complex drug product Urolesan is a litholytic, antispasmodic, and diuretic agent. It contains ethanolic extract of:
a. Rhododendron tomentosum
*b. Origanum vulgare
c. -
d. Matricaria chamomilla
e. Thymus serpyllum
1403. Complex drug product Urolesan is a litholytic, antispasmodic, and diuretic agent. It contains ethanolic extract of:
a. Rhododendron tomentosum
*b. Origanum vulgare
c. -
d. Thymus serpyllum
e. Matricaria chamomilla
1404. Complex drug product Urolesan is a litholytic, antispasmodic, and diuretic agent. It contains ethanolic extract of:
a. Rhododendron tomentosum
b. Matricaria chamomilla
c. -
d. Thymus serpyllum
*e. Origanum vulgare
1405. Concentrated solutions are used to speed up the preparation of mixtures. What volume of a 5% sodium bicarbonate solution (1:20) must be taken to prepare a mixture that contains 6.0 g of the medicinal substance?
*a. 120 mL
b. 90 mL
c. 30 mL
d. 7.5 mL
e. 60 mL
1406. Concentrated solutions are used to speed up the preparation of mixtures. What volume of a 5% sodium bicarbonate solution (1:20) must be taken to prepare a mixture that contains 6.0 g of the medicinal substance?
a. 60 mL
b. 30 mL
c. 7.5 mL
d. 90 mL
*e. 120 mL
1407. Concentrated solutions are used to speed up the preparation of mixtures. What volume of a 5% sodium bicarbonate solution (1:20) must be taken to prepare a mixture that contains 6.0 g of the medicinal substance?
a. 7.5 mL
b. 60 mL
c. 30 mL
d. 90 mL
*e. 120 mL
1408. Considering thermolability of most animal-derived injection preparations, they are sterilized by means of:
a. Addition of buffer solutions
b. High frequency current
*c. Filtration through membrane
d. In autoclave chamber with high-pressure saturated steam
e. Ultrasound
1409. Considering thermolability of most animal-derived injection preparations, they are sterilized by means of:
a. In autoclave chamber with high-pressure saturated steam
b. Addition of buffer solutions
c. High frequency current
d. Ultrasound
*e. Filtration through membrane
1410. Considering thermolability of most animal-derived injection preparations, they are sterilized by means of:
a. In autoclave chamber with high-pressure saturated steam
b. High frequency current
*c. Filtration through membrane
d. Ultrasound
e. Addition of buffer solutions
1411. Core tablets that are to be made into dragees must not have a flat shape. Why such requirement is necessary?
a. They are not durable enough
b. To speed up the process of applying the coating
c. To improve their appearance
d. To avoid prolonged contact with overlaying suspension
*e. To prevent them from adhesion to each other
1412. Core tablets that are to be made into dragees must not have a flat shape. Why such requirement is necessary?
a. To avoid prolonged contact with overlaying suspension
b. To speed up the process of applying the coating
c. They are not durable enough
*d. To prevent them from adhesion to each other
e. To improve their appearance
1413. Core tablets that are to be made into dragees must not have a flat shape. Why such requirement is necessary?
a. To improve their appearance
b. They are not durable enough
c. To avoid prolonged contact with overlaying suspension
*d. To prevent them from adhesion to each other
e. To speed up the process of applying the coating
1414. Cross-section of the leaf of a medicinal plant shows cystoliths and stinging hairs with a multicellular base and a large cell on the apex that ends in a widened tip that breaks off. What herbal raw material has such microscopic characteristics?
*a. Urtica dioica
b. Origanum vulgare
c. Atropa belladonna
d. Capsella bursa-pastoris
e. Mentha piperita
1415. Cross-section of the leaf of a medicinal plant shows cystoliths and stinging hairs with a multicellular base and a large cell on the apex that ends in a widened tip that breaks off. What herbal raw material has such microscopic characteristics?
a. Atropa belladonna
b. Capsella bursa-pastoris
*c. Urtica dioica
d. Mentha piperita
e. Origanum vulgare
1416. Cross-section of the leaf of a medicinal plant shows cystoliths and stinging hairs with a multicellular base and a large cell on the apex that ends in a widened tip that breaks off. What herbal raw material has such microscopic characteristics?
a. Capsella bursa-pastoris
b. Mentha piperita
c. Atropa belladonna
*d. Urtica dioica
e. Origanum vulgare
1417. Cynara scolymus herbal raw material is a source of drugs with antisclerotic, choleretic, and hepatoprotective effect. What parts of the plant are harvested as a herbal raw material?
*a. Leaves and flower heads
b. Fruits
c. Seeds
d. Roots
e. Grass
1418. Cynara scolymus herbal raw material is a source of drugs with antisclerotic, choleretic, and hepatoprotective effect. What parts of the plant are harvested as a herbal raw material?
a. Roots
b. Fruits
c. Seeds
*d. Leaves and flower heads
e. Grass
1419. Cynara scolymus herbal raw material is a source of drugs with antisclerotic, choleretic, and hepatoprotective effect. What parts of the plant are harvested as a herbal raw material?
a. Roots
b. Grass
c. Seeds
d. Fruits
*e. Leaves and flower heads
1420. Difference between the retail price of products sold and the margin determines:
*a. Production cost
b. Income
c. Breakeven
d. Markup
e. Margin
1421. Difference between the retail price of products sold and the margin determines:
*a. Production cost
b. Margin
c. Markup
d. Income
e. Breakeven
1422. Difference between the retail price of products sold and the margin determines:
a. Markup
*b. Production cost
c. Breakeven
d. Margin
e. Income
1423. Different types of granulation are used in the tablet production. What is the most productive method of structural granulation?
a. Granulation in spray dryers
b. Granulation using briquetting
c. Wet granulation in vertical granulators
d. Granulation in the dragee pan
*e. Granulation in the fluidized bed
1424. Different types of granulation are used in the tablet production. What is the most productive method of structural granulation?
a. Granulation using briquetting
*b. Granulation in the fluidized bed
c. Wet granulation in vertical granulators
d. Granulation in spray dryers
e. Granulation in the dragee pan
1425. Different types of granulation are used in the tablet production. What is the most productive method of structural granulation?
a. Wet granulation in vertical granulators
*b. Granulation in the fluidized bed
c. Granulation using briquetting
d. Granulation in spray dryers
e. Granulation in the dragee pan
1426. Digoxin is given to the patients with chronic heart failure. What medicinal plant that contains cardiac glycoside is a source of this medicinal substance?
*a. Digitalis lanata
b. Convallaria majalis
c. Strophanthus kombe
d. Erysimum canescens
e. Adonis vernalis
1427. Digoxin is given to the patients with chronic heart failure. What medicinal plant that contains cardiac glycoside is a source of this medicinal substance?
a. Erysimum canescens
b. Strophanthus kombe
c. Adonis vernalis
*d. Digitalis lanata
e. Convallaria majalis
1428. Digoxin is given to the patients with chronic heart failure. What medicinal plant that contains cardiac glycoside is a source of this medicinal substance?
a. Strophanthus kombe
b. Convallaria majalis
c. Adonis vernalis
*d. Digitalis lanata
e. Erysimum canescens
1429. Direct argentometric titration using the Mohr method can be used for quantification of sulfathiazole (norsulfazole). What indicator is used in such analysis?
a. Bromophenol blue
*b. Potassium chromate
c. Tropeolin 00
d. Starch
e. Methylene blue
1430. Direct argentometric titration using the Mohr method can be used for quantification of sulfathiazole (norsulfazole). What indicator is used in such analysis?
a. Starch
*b. Potassium chromate
c. Bromophenol blue
d. Methylene blue
e. Tropeolin 00
1431. Direct argentometric titration using the Mohr method can be used for quantification of sulfathiazole (norsulfazole). What indicator is used in such analysis?
a. Starch
b. Tropeolin 00
*c. Potassium chromate
d. Methylene blue
e. Bromophenol blue
1432. Doctor's prescription fulfills several functions. What function indicates that the doctor bears responsibility for correct prescription of medicines to the patient?
a. Social
b. Economic
*c. Legal
d. Technological
e. Informational
1433. Doctor's prescription fulfills several functions. What function indicates that the doctor bears responsibility for correct prescription of medicines to the patient?
a. Social
b. Technological
c. Informational
*d. Legal
e. Economic
1434. Doctor's prescription fulfills several functions. What function indicates that the doctor bears responsibility for correct prescription of medicines to the patient?
a. Technological
b. Informational
c. Economic
*d. Legal
e. Social
1435. Doctor's prescription has several functions. What function of the prescription allows its participation in the process of payment in cases when medicines should be issued free of charge or at a reduced price?
a. Legal
b. Technological
c. Social
*d. Economic
e. Medical
1436. Doctor's prescription has several functions. What function of the prescription allows its participation in the process of payment in cases when medicines should be issued free of charge or at a reduced price?
a. Social
*b. Economic
c. Legal
d. Medical
e. Technological
1437. Doctor's prescription has several functions. What function of the prescription allows its participation in the process of payment in cases when medicines should be issued free of charge or at a reduced price?
a. Social
b. Medical
*c. Economic
d. Legal
e. Technological
1438. Dosage precision during tablet making mainly depends on the following technological property of tablet mass:
a. Lyophilic property
*b. Flowability
c. Compressibility
d. Relative density
e. Compression ratio
1439. Dosage precision during tablet making mainly depends on the following technological property of tablet mass:
a. Relative density
b. Compressibility
*c. Flowability
d. Lyophilic property
e. Compression ratio
1440. Dosage precision during tablet making mainly depends on the following technological property of tablet mass:
a. Relative density
b. Compressibility
c. Compression ratio
*d. Flowability
e. Lyophilic property
1441. Dried Vaccinium berries can be used as an astringent. The astringent properties of this herbal raw material are caused by the presence of certain substances. Name these substances.
*a. Tannins
b. Flavonoids
c. Alkaloids
d. Iridoids
e. Polysaccharides
1442. Dried Vaccinium berries can be used as an astringent. The astringent properties of this herbal raw material are caused by the presence of certain substances. Name these substances.
a. Alkaloids
b. Polysaccharides
c. Flavonoids
*d. Tannins
e. Iridoids
1443. Dried Vaccinium berries can be used as an astringent. The astringent properties of this herbal raw material are caused by the presence of certain substances. Name these substances.
a. Iridoids
b. Flavonoids
c. Alkaloids
*d. Tannins
e. Polysaccharides
1444. Drugs derived from Rauvolfia serpentina roots are used in hypertension treatment. Authenticity of Rauvolfia serpentina herbal raw material can be confirmed by its content of:
a. Adonitoxin
b. Atropine
c. Vinblastine
d. Hyoscyamine
*e. Reserpine
1445. Drugs derived from Rauvolfia serpentina roots are used in hypertension treatment. Authenticity of Rauvolfia serpentina herbal raw material can be confirmed by its content of:
a. Atropine
*b. Reserpine
c. Vinblastine
d. Adonitoxin
e. Hyoscyamine
1446. Drugs derived from Rauvolfia serpentina roots are used in hypertension treatment. Authenticity of Rauvolfia serpentina herbal raw material can be confirmed by its content of:
a. Vinblastine
*b. Reserpine
c. Adonitoxin
d. Hyoscyamine
e. Atropine
1447. During H. pylori eradication quadrotherapy, a 25-year-old man  developed black feces. What medicine provoked such a side effect in this case?
*a. Bismuth subcitrate
b. Metronidazole
c. Omeprazole
d. Tetracycline
e. Amoxicillin
1448. During H. pylori eradication quadrotherapy, a 25-year-old man  developed black feces. What medicine provoked such a side effect in this case?
a. Amoxicillin
b. Tetracycline
c. Metronidazole
d. Omeprazole
*e. Bismuth subcitrate
1449. During H. pylori eradication quadrotherapy, a 25-year-old man  developed black feces. What medicine provoked such a side effect in this case?
a. Amoxicillin
b. Tetracycline
c. Omeprazole
d. Metronidazole
*e. Bismuth subcitrate
1450. During a practical session in pharmaceutical chemistry, a pharmaceutical student performs quantitative determination of caffeine substance. What method according to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine should be used for this purpose?
*a. Acid-base titration in nonaqueous medium
b. Cerimetry
c. Bromometry
d. Complexometric titration
e. Permanganatometry
1451. During a practical session in pharmaceutical chemistry, a pharmaceutical student performs quantitative determination of caffeine substance. What method according to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine should be used for this purpose?
*a. Acid-base titration in nonaqueous medium
b. Complexometric titration
c. Cerimetry
d. Permanganatometry
e. Bromometry
1452. During a practical session in pharmaceutical chemistry, a pharmaceutical student performs quantitative determination of caffeine substance. What method according to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine should be used for this purpose?
a. Cerimetry
b. Complexometric titration
*c. Acid-base titration in nonaqueous medium
d. Permanganatometry
e. Bromometry
1453. During an asphyxiating attack the patient with bronchial asthma was given intravenously a drug that caused nausea, headache, excitation, and palpitations as side effects. What drug can cause such reaction?
*a. Euphylline (Aminophylline)
b. Papaverine hydrochloride
c. Suprastin (Chloropyramine)
d. Ambroxol
e. Prednisolone
1454. During an asphyxiating attack the patient with bronchial asthma was given intravenously a drug that caused nausea, headache, excitation, and palpitations as side effects. What drug can cause such reaction?
a. Ambroxol
b. Suprastin (Chloropyramine)
c. Prednisolone
d. Papaverine hydrochloride
*e. Euphylline (Aminophylline)
1455. During an asphyxiating attack the patient with bronchial asthma was given intravenously a drug that caused nausea, headache, excitation, and palpitations as side effects. What drug can cause such reaction?
a. Papaverine hydrochloride
b. Prednisolone
c. Suprastin (Chloropyramine)
*d. Euphylline (Aminophylline)
e. Ambroxol
1456. During anti-Helicobacter quadrotherapy patient's feces colored black. What drug could have caused this effect?
a. Amoxicillin
*b. Bismuth subcitrate
c. Omeprazole
d. Clarithromycin
e. Metronidazole
1457. During anti-Helicobacter quadrotherapy patient's feces colored black. What drug could have caused this effect?
a. Amoxicillin
b. Metronidazole
c. Omeprazole
d. Clarithromycin
*e. Bismuth subcitrate
1458. During anti-Helicobacter quadrotherapy patient's feces colored black. What drug could have caused this effect?
a. Clarithromycin
b. Omeprazole
*c. Bismuth subcitrate
d. Metronidazole
e. Amoxicillin
1459. During drug identification, a sample of the substance was moistened with concentrated sulfuric acid and the bottom of the test tube was carefully heated. A white plaque appeared that coated the test tube walls from the inside. What substance can be detected using this reaction?
a. Nitrofural (Nitrofurazone)
b. Benzocaine
c. Morphine hydrochloride
d. Theophylline monohydrate
*e. Sodium benzoate
1460. During drug identification, a sample of the substance was moistened with concentrated sulfuric acid and the bottom of the test tube was carefully heated. A white plaque appeared that coated the test tube walls from the inside. What substance can be detected using this reaction?
a. Nitrofural (Nitrofurazone)
b. Benzocaine
c. Theophylline monohydrate
*d. Sodium benzoate
e. Morphine hydrochloride
1461. During drug identification, a sample of the substance was moistened with concentrated sulfuric acid and the bottom of the test tube was carefully heated. A white plaque appeared that coated the test tube walls from the inside. What substance can be detected using this reaction?
a. Theophylline monohydrate
b. Nitrofural (Nitrofurazone)
*c. Sodium benzoate
d. Benzocaine
e. Morphine hydrochloride
1462. During identification of a herbal raw material, an analytical chemist prepared water-based extractions and shook the test tube, which resulted in the formation of a large amount of stable foam. What bioactive substances are present in the material?
a. Alkaloids
b. Tannins
c. Anthracene derivatives
*d. Saponins
e. Fatty oil
1463. During identification of a herbal raw material, an analytical chemist prepared water-based extractions and shook the test tube, which resulted in the formation of a large amount of stable foam. What bioactive substances are present in the material?
a. Tannins
b. Alkaloids
c. Fatty oil
*d. Saponins
e. Anthracene derivatives
1464. During identification of a herbal raw material, an analytical chemist prepared water-based extractions and shook the test tube, which resulted in the formation of a large amount of stable foam. What bioactive substances are present in the material?
a. Tannins
b. Fatty oil
*c. Saponins
d. Anthracene derivatives
e. Alkaloids
1465. During identification of a medicinal substance, a chloroform layer colors yellow-orange after addition of a solution of chloramine and hydrochloric acid. Name this substance:
a. Potassium iodide
b. Potassium fluoride
*c. Sodium bromide
d. Sodium chloride
e. Sodium fluoride
1466. During identification of a medicinal substance, a chloroform layer colors yellow-orange after addition of a solution of chloramine and hydrochloric acid. Name this substance:
a. Potassium iodide
b. Sodium chloride
c. Potassium fluoride
*d. Sodium bromide
e. Sodium fluoride
1467. During identification of a medicinal substance, a chloroform layer colors yellow-orange after addition of a solution of chloramine and hydrochloric acid. Name this substance:
a. Sodium chloride
*b. Sodium bromide
c. Potassium iodide
d. Potassium fluoride
e. Sodium fluoride
1468. During identification these active substances form precipitates in gelatin and alkaloid solutions and produce precipitates with heavy metal salts. These active substances are:
*a. Tannins
b. Glycosides
c. Carbohydrates
d. Lipids
e. Iridoids
1469. During identification these active substances form precipitates in gelatin and alkaloid solutions and produce precipitates with heavy metal salts. These active substances are:
a. Iridoids
b. Glycosides
c. Carbohydrates
d. Lipids
*e. Tannins
1470. During identification these active substances form precipitates in gelatin and alkaloid solutions and produce precipitates with heavy metal salts. These active substances are:
a. Iridoids
b. Lipids
*c. Tannins
d. Carbohydrates
e. Glycosides
1471. During limit test for aluminium admixture, the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine recommends to use the following solution as the basic reagent:
a. Sodium hypophosphite
*b. Hydroxyquinoline
c. Barium chloride
d. Sodium tetraphenylborate
e. Thioglycolic acid
1472. During limit test for aluminium admixture, the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine recommends to use the following solution as the basic reagent:
a. Sodium hypophosphite
*b. Hydroxyquinoline
c. Barium chloride
d. Thioglycolic acid
e. Sodium tetraphenylborate
1473. During limit test for aluminium admixture, the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine recommends to use the following solution as the basic reagent:
a. Sodium tetraphenylborate
b. Barium chloride
c. Thioglycolic acid
d. Sodium hypophosphite
*e. Hydroxyquinoline
1474. During macroscopic analysis of rhizomes with roots, a pharmacist notes that rhizomes often have a cavity in their center. The color of the raw material is reddish-brown on the outside, while on section reddish-brown bark and orange-red wood are visible. The taste is sweet at first, but becomes slightly astringent and bitter later. What plant is the source of this herbal raw material?
*a. Rubia tinctorum
b. Mentha piperita
c. Melissa officinalis
d. Thymus serpyllum
e. Sambucus nigra
1475. During macroscopic analysis of rhizomes with roots, a pharmacist notes that rhizomes often have a cavity in their center. The color of the raw material is reddish-brown on the outside, while on section reddish-brown bark and orange-red wood are visible. The taste is sweet at first, but becomes slightly astringent and bitter later. What plant is the source of this herbal raw material?
a. Melissa officinalis
b. Sambucus nigra
c. Thymus serpyllum
d. Mentha piperita
*e. Rubia tinctorum
1476. During macroscopic analysis of rhizomes with roots, a pharmacist notes that rhizomes often have a cavity in their center. The color of the raw material is reddish-brown on the outside, while on section reddish-brown bark and orange-red wood are visible. The taste is sweet at first, but becomes slightly astringent and bitter later. What plant is the source of this herbal raw material?
a. Mentha piperita
b. Melissa officinalis
c. Thymus serpyllum
*d. Rubia tinctorum
e. Sambucus nigra
1477. During merchandise analysis a dispensing chemist should reject herbal raw material if it:
*a. Contains poisonous plants
b. Contains other non-poisonous plants
c. Contains excessive moisture
d. Has first-degree vermin infestation
e. Contains other parts of the target plant
1478. During merchandise analysis a dispensing chemist should reject herbal raw material if it:
a. Contains other parts of the target plant
b. Has first-degree vermin infestation
*c. Contains poisonous plants
d. Contains excessive moisture
e. Contains other non-poisonous plants
1479. During merchandise analysis a dispensing chemist should reject herbal raw material if it:
a. Has first-degree vermin infestation
b. Contains excessive moisture
c. Contains other non-poisonous plants
d. Contains other parts of the target plant
*e. Contains poisonous plants
1480. During pharmaceutical analysis of a medicinal substance, its reaction with antipyrine (phenazone) was conducted in the presence of dilute hydrochloric acid. What compounds are present there, as indicated by the green coloring that appeared in the process of the analysis?
*a. Nitrites
b. Fluorides
c. Iodides
d. Bromides
e. Sulfates
1481. During pharmaceutical analysis of a medicinal substance, its reaction with antipyrine (phenazone) was conducted in the presence of dilute hydrochloric acid. What compounds are present there, as indicated by the green coloring that appeared in the process of the analysis?
a. Fluorides
b. Bromides
*c. Nitrites
d. Iodides
e. Sulfates
1482. During pharmaceutical analysis of a medicinal substance, its reaction with antipyrine (phenazone) was conducted in the presence of dilute hydrochloric acid. What compounds are present there, as indicated by the green coloring that appeared in the process of the analysis?
a. Sulfates
b. Fluorides
c. Bromides
d. Iodides
*e. Nitrites
1483. During quantitative determination of Vicasol (Menadione) by means of cerimetry, the following indicator is used:
a. Methyl orange
b. Naphtholbenzein
*c. Ferroin
d. Crystal violet
e. Methyl red
1484. During quantitative determination of Vicasol (Menadione) by means of cerimetry, the following indicator is used:
a. Methyl orange
b. Naphtholbenzein
*c. Ferroin
d. Methyl red
e. Crystal violet
1485. During quantitative determination of Vicasol (Menadione) by means of cerimetry, the following indicator is used:
a. Naphtholbenzein
b. Crystal violet
c. Methyl red
d. Methyl orange
*e. Ferroin
1486. During quantitative determination of ascorbic acid by means of iodometry the following should be used as an indicator:
*a. Starch
b. Murexide
c. Diphenylcarbazone
d. Bromphenol blue
e. Phenolphthalein
1487. During quantitative determination of ascorbic acid by means of iodometry the following should be used as an indicator:
a. Bromphenol blue
b. Phenolphthalein
c. Murexide
d. Diphenylcarbazone
*e. Starch
1488. During quantitative determination of ascorbic acid by means of iodometry the following should be used as an indicator:
a. Diphenylcarbazone
*b. Starch
c. Phenolphthalein
d. Bromphenol blue
e. Murexide
1489. During stock-taking at a pharmacy, a surplus of material goods was discovered. What should the inventory committee do with the discovered surplus?
*a. Recording as received
b. Writing off
c. Confiscation
d. Conducting an official investigation
e. Elimination
1490. During stock-taking at a pharmacy, a surplus of material goods was discovered. What should the inventory committee do with the discovered surplus?
a. Conducting an official investigation
b. Elimination
c. Writing off
*d. Recording as received
e. Confiscation
1491. During stock-taking at a pharmacy, a surplus of material goods was discovered. What should the inventory committee do with the discovered surplus?
a. Writing off
b. Conducting an official investigation
*c. Recording as received
d. Confiscation
e. Elimination
1492. During storage, suspension instability manifests itself as:
*a. Sedimentation of particles
b. Flocculation of particles
c. Caking of particles
d. Dissolution of particles
e. Change of particles shape
1493. During storage, suspension instability manifests itself as:
a. Caking of particles
*b. Sedimentation of particles
c. Flocculation of particles
d. Change of particles shape
e. Dissolution of particles
1494. During storage, suspension instability manifests itself as:
a. Flocculation of particles
b. Change of particles shape
c. Caking of particles
*d. Sedimentation of particles
e. Dissolution of particles
1495. During the microscopy of a herbal raw material, the pharmacist noted its main diagnostic features: calcium oxalate druses in the mesophyll of the leaf and along the veins, simple unicellular hairs, covering stellate hairs with 4-8 thick-walled, porous and often lignified rays at their base, idioblast cells with slime. What herbal raw material can be characterized by the listed diagnostic features?
a. Digitalis purpurea folium
b. Hyoscyamus niger folium
c. Gnaphalium uliginosum herba
*d. Althaea officinalis herba
e. Urtica dioica folium
1496. During the microscopy of a herbal raw material, the pharmacist noted its main diagnostic features: calcium oxalate druses in the mesophyll of the leaf and along the veins, simple unicellular hairs, covering stellate hairs with 4-8 thick-walled, porous and often lignified rays at their base, idioblast cells with slime. What herbal raw material can be characterized by the listed diagnostic features?
a. Hyoscyamus niger folium
b. Digitalis purpurea folium
c. Gnaphalium uliginosum herba
*d. Althaea officinalis herba
e. Urtica dioica folium
1497. During the microscopy of a herbal raw material, the pharmacist noted its main diagnostic features: calcium oxalate druses in the mesophyll of the leaf and along the veins, simple unicellular hairs, covering stellate hairs with 4-8 thick-walled, porous and often lignified rays at their base, idioblast cells with slime. What herbal raw material can be characterized by the listed diagnostic features?
a. Urtica dioica folium
b. Gnaphalium uliginosum herba
c. Hyoscyamus niger folium
d. Digitalis purpurea folium
*e. Althaea officinalis herba
1498. During the transportation of alkaloid drugs, the markings on their packaging were damaged. Qualitative group reactions for alkaloids revealed that the Vitali-Morin test was positive. Therefore, the analyzed drug belongs to the following group of derivatives:
a. Purine derivatives
b. Isoquinoline derivatives
c. Quinuclidine derivatives
d. Indole derivatives
*e. Tropane derivatives
1499. During the transportation of alkaloid drugs, the markings on their packaging were damaged. Qualitative group reactions for alkaloids revealed that the Vitali-Morin test was positive. Therefore, the analyzed drug belongs to the following group of derivatives:
a. Purine derivatives
b. Quinuclidine derivatives
c. Isoquinoline derivatives
*d. Tropane derivatives
e. Indole derivatives
1500. During the transportation of alkaloid drugs, the markings on their packaging were damaged. Qualitative group reactions for alkaloids revealed that the Vitali-Morin test was positive. Therefore, the analyzed drug belongs to the following group of derivatives:
a. Quinuclidine derivatives
b. Purine derivatives
*c. Tropane derivatives
d. Isoquinoline derivatives
e. Indole derivatives
1501. During the two years of working in his position, the pharmacist proved to be a responsible and efficient specialist. The pharmacy's head manager appointed him to the position of the head of the Extemporaneous Compounding Department. What is this type of personnel movement called?
*a. Helical (vertical) rotation
b. Employee turnover
c. Recruitment
d. Mixed rotation
e. Spiral (horizontal) rotation
1502. During the two years of working in his position, the pharmacist proved to be a responsible and efficient specialist. The pharmacy's head manager appointed him to the position of the head of the Extemporaneous Compounding Department. What is this type of personnel movement called?
a. Employee turnover
b. Mixed rotation
c. Recruitment
*d. Helical (vertical) rotation
e. Spiral (horizontal) rotation
1503. During the two years of working in his position, the pharmacist proved to be a responsible and efficient specialist. The pharmacy's head manager appointed him to the position of the head of the Extemporaneous Compounding Department. What is this type of personnel movement called?
a. Recruitment
*b. Helical (vertical) rotation
c. Spiral (horizontal) rotation
d. Employee turnover
e. Mixed rotation
1504. During visual inspection of a product, the authorized person developed doubts about the quality of the received medicines. What should the authorized person do, to initiate the laboratory testing of the medicine quality?
a. Send the medicines back to the manufacturer
b. Send the medicines to the Ministry of Health of Ukraine
*c. Send the medicines to a local laboratory of the State Drugs and Medications Control Service
d. Send the medicines to the nearest compounding pharmacy that employs a dispensing chemist
e. Send the medicines back to the supplier
1505. During visual inspection of a product, the authorized person developed doubts about the quality of the received medicines. What should the authorized person do, to initiate the laboratory testing of the medicine quality?
a. Send the medicines back to the supplier
b. Send the medicines back to the manufacturer
c. Send the medicines to the nearest compounding pharmacy that employs a dispensing chemist
d. Send the medicines to the Ministry of Health of Ukraine
*e. Send the medicines to a local laboratory of the State Drugs and Medications Control Service
1506. During visual inspection of a product, the authorized person developed doubts about the quality of the received medicines. What should the authorized person do, to initiate the laboratory testing of the medicine quality?
a. Send the medicines back to the supplier
b. Send the medicines to the nearest compounding pharmacy that employs a dispensing chemist
c. Send the medicines back to the manufacturer
*d. Send the medicines to a local laboratory of the State Drugs and Medications Control Service
e. Send the medicines to the Ministry of Health of Ukraine
1507. Each medical product that a pharmacy receives should have its quality certificate. How long should these certificates be kept by a pharmacy?
a. 1 year
b. 5 years
*c. 3 years
d. 6 years
e. 2 years
1508. Each medical product that a pharmacy receives should have its quality certificate. How long should these certificates be kept by a pharmacy?
a. 2 years
b. 6 years
*c. 3 years
d. 5 years
e. 1 year
1509. Each medical product that a pharmacy receives should have its quality certificate. How long should these certificates be kept by a pharmacy?
a. 6 years
*b. 3 years
c. 1 year
d. 2 years
e. 5 years
1510. Employees of a pharmaceutical company have formed a group consisting of cycle sport fans. Such group is called:
*a. Informal
b. Formal
c. Committee
d. Manufacturing
e. Commercial
1511. Employees of a pharmaceutical company have formed a group consisting of cycle sport fans. Such group is called:
a. Formal
*b. Informal
c. Manufacturing
d. Committee
e. Commercial
1512. Employees of a pharmaceutical company have formed a group consisting of cycle sport fans. Such group is called:
a. Manufacturing
b. Formal
c. Commercial
*d. Informal
e. Committee
1513. Employees of a wholesale pharmaceutical company have undergone an assessment for their compliance with the requirements of their respective positions. Specify the type of human resources assessment:
*a. Concluding
b. Concurrent
c. -
d. Financial
e. Preliminary
1514. Employees of a wholesale pharmaceutical company have undergone an assessment for their compliance with the requirements of their respective positions. Specify the type of human resources assessment:
a. Concurrent
b. Preliminary
c. -
d. Financial
*e. Concluding
1515. Employees of a wholesale pharmaceutical company have undergone an assessment for their compliance with the requirements of their respective positions. Specify the type of human resources assessment:
a. Financial
*b. Concluding
c. Concurrent
d. Preliminary
e. -
1516. Eradication therapy must be prescribed for a patient with peptic ulcer disease of the duodenum. What antisecretory agent must be included into the eradication therapy scheme?
a. Almagel
*b. Omeprazole
c. Phosphalugel (Aluminum phosphate)
d. Ranitidine
e. Famotidine
1517. Eradication therapy must be prescribed for a patient with peptic ulcer disease of the duodenum. What antisecretory agent must be included into the eradication therapy scheme?
a. Phosphalugel (Aluminum phosphate)
b. Almagel
c. Famotidine
d. Ranitidine
*e. Omeprazole
1518. Eradication therapy must be prescribed for a patient with peptic ulcer disease of the duodenum. What antisecretory agent must be included into the eradication therapy scheme?
a. Ranitidine
b. Almagel
c. Phosphalugel (Aluminum phosphate)
*d. Omeprazole
e. Famotidine
1519. Erythromycin belongs to the following type of antibiotics based on its chemical structure:
a. Aromatic antibiotics
b. Polyene antibiotics
c. beta-lactams
*d. Macrolides
e. Polypeptides
1520. Erythromycin belongs to the following type of antibiotics based on its chemical structure:
a. Polyene antibiotics
b. Polypeptides
c. Aromatic antibiotics
*d. Macrolides
e. beta-lactams
1521. Erythromycin belongs to the following type of antibiotics based on its chemical structure:
a. beta-lactams
b. Polyene antibiotics
c. Aromatic antibiotics
*d. Macrolides
e. Polypeptides
1522. Essential oil of a certain plant contains up to 80% of cineole. Specify the herbal raw material that is collected from this plant:
*a. Folia Eucalypti
b. Folia Absinthii
c. Folia Menthae piperitae
d. Folia Betulae
e. Folia Мelissae
1523. Essential oil of a certain plant contains up to 80% of cineole. Specify the herbal raw material that is collected from this plant:
*a. Folia Eucalypti
b. Folia Betulae
c. Folia Absinthii
d. Folia Мelissae
e. Folia Menthae piperitae
1524. Essential oil of a certain plant contains up to 80% of cineole. Specify the herbal raw material that is collected from this plant:
a. Folia Menthae piperitae
*b. Folia Eucalypti
c. Folia Betulae
d. Folia Мelissae
e. Folia Absinthii
1525. Eucalyptus essential oil is used as an antiseptic. What excretory structures of a leaf accumulate this substance?
*a. Essential oil cavities
b. Glandular hairs
c. Glandular <<spots>>
d. Secretory cells
e. Essential oil glandules
1526. Eucalyptus essential oil is used as an antiseptic. What excretory structures of a leaf accumulate this substance?
a. Essential oil glandules
b. Glandular <<spots>>
*c. Essential oil cavities
d. Glandular hairs
e. Secretory cells
1527. Eucalyptus essential oil is used as an antiseptic. What excretory structures of a leaf accumulate this substance?
a. Glandular <<spots>>
b. Essential oil glandules
*c. Essential oil cavities
d. Glandular hairs
e. Secretory cells
1528. Every pharmacy as a business has its income and expenditure operations. What business transaction will result in a summary increase of stocked goods?
a. Money transfer from a bank to the cash desk
b. Debt recovery from a person accountable
*c. Goods receipt from the supplier
d. Receipt of low-value wearing goods
e. Issuing money to be accounted for
1529. Every pharmacy as a business has its income and expenditure operations. What business transaction will result in a summary increase of stocked goods?
a. Money transfer from a bank to the cash desk
b. Receipt of low-value wearing goods
c. Debt recovery from a person accountable
d. Issuing money to be accounted for
*e. Goods receipt from the supplier
1530. Every pharmacy as a business has its income and expenditure operations. What business transaction will result in a summary increase of stocked goods?
a. Receipt of low-value wearing goods
*b. Goods receipt from the supplier
c. Debt recovery from a person accountable
d. Issuing money to be accounted for
e. Money transfer from a bank to the cash desk
1531. Folia Eucalypti is used as an antiseptic, anti-inflammatory, analgesic, and bactericidal agent. What group of bioactive substances is measured for the quality control of Folia Eucalypti?
*a. Essential oils
b. Alkaloids
c. Flavonoids
d. Cardiac glycosides
e. Polysaccharides
1532. Folia Eucalypti is used as an antiseptic, anti-inflammatory, analgesic, and bactericidal agent. What group of bioactive substances is measured for the quality control of Folia Eucalypti?
a. Alkaloids
b. Polysaccharides
c. Cardiac glycosides
*d. Essential oils
e. Flavonoids
1533. Folia Eucalypti is used as an antiseptic, anti-inflammatory, analgesic, and bactericidal agent. What group of bioactive substances is measured for the quality control of Folia Eucalypti?
a. Flavonoids
*b. Essential oils
c. Alkaloids
d. Polysaccharides
e. Cardiac glycosides
1534. For 2 weeks, a pharmacy network has been holding a lottery among its visitors who have purchased over 200 UAH worth of medicines. What set of marketing activities does the pharmacy network use in this case?
a. Advertising
b. Public relations
c. Personal selling
d. Lobbying
*e. Sales promotion
1535. For 2 weeks, a pharmacy network has been holding a lottery among its visitors who have purchased over 200 UAH worth of medicines. What set of marketing activities does the pharmacy network use in this case?
a. Lobbying
b. Personal selling
*c. Sales promotion
d. Advertising
e. Public relations
1536. For better coverage of various markets the Lubnyfarm company sells a portion of its production through its chain of pharmacies, another portion is being sold through distributors, and the third - through pharmacies of another owners. What marketing system of distribution is used by this company?
*a. Multichannel
b. Administered
c. Corporate
d. Contractual
e. Horizontal
1537. For better coverage of various markets the Lubnyfarm company sells a portion of its production through its chain of pharmacies, another portion is being sold through distributors, and the third - through pharmacies of another owners. What marketing system of distribution is used by this company?
*a. Multichannel
b. Contractual
c. Administered
d. Corporate
e. Horizontal
1538. For better coverage of various markets the Lubnyfarm company sells a portion of its production through its chain of pharmacies, another portion is being sold through distributors, and the third - through pharmacies of another owners. What marketing system of distribution is used by this company?
a. Corporate
b. Administered
*c. Multichannel
d. Contractual
e. Horizontal
1539. For rapid analysis of a dosage form with procaine hydrochloride, an analytical chemist performed necessary chemical reactions. What reaction is a variation of Schiff base formation?
*a. Lignin test
b. Iodoform test
c. <<Silver mirror>> reaction
d. Hydroxamic reaction
e. Azo dye formation
1540. For rapid analysis of a dosage form with procaine hydrochloride, an analytical chemist performed necessary chemical reactions. What reaction is a variation of Schiff base formation?
a. <<Silver mirror>> reaction
b. Hydroxamic reaction
c. Azo dye formation
d. Iodoform test
*e. Lignin test
1541. For rapid analysis of a dosage form with procaine hydrochloride, an analytical chemist performed necessary chemical reactions. What reaction is a variation of Schiff base formation?
a. Azo dye formation
b. Hydroxamic reaction
c. Iodoform test
d. <<Silver mirror>> reaction
*e. Lignin test
1542. For targeted delivery of medicinal substances, a special dosage form is used. It is formed by a double lipid layer with the cavities, within which the formation sphere is located. What is the name of this dosage form?
a. OROS tablet
*b. Liposome
c. Infusion therapeutic system
d. Matrix tablet
e. Transdermal therapeutic system
1543. For targeted delivery of medicinal substances, a special dosage form is used. It is formed by a double lipid layer with the cavities, within which the formation sphere is located. What is the name of this dosage form?
a. Transdermal therapeutic system
*b. Liposome
c. Matrix tablet
d. OROS tablet
e. Infusion therapeutic system
1544. For the treatment of cystitis, the doctor prescribed the patient a herbal drug. This drug is used in cases of acute and chronic infectious diseases of the kidneys and bladder. What herbal raw material that contains iridoids and xanthones is a component of this drug?
a. Equisetum arvense grass
*b. Centaurium grass
c. Centaurea cyanus flowers
d. Vaccinium vitis-idaea leaves
e. Birch leaves
1545. For the treatment of cystitis, the doctor prescribed the patient a herbal drug. This drug is used in cases of acute and chronic infectious diseases of the kidneys and bladder. What herbal raw material that contains iridoids and xanthones is a component of this drug?
a. Equisetum arvense grass
b. Birch leaves
*c. Centaurium grass
d. Vaccinium vitis-idaea leaves
e. Centaurea cyanus flowers
1546. For the treatment of cystitis, the doctor prescribed the patient a herbal drug. This drug is used in cases of acute and chronic infectious diseases of the kidneys and bladder. What herbal raw material that contains iridoids and xanthones is a component of this drug?
a. Equisetum arvense grass
b. Centaurea cyanus flowers
c. Birch leaves
d. Vaccinium vitis-idaea leaves
*e. Centaurium grass
1547. For treatment of enteric infection a 36-year-old woman was prescribed a nitrofuran derivative that is poorly absorbed in the intestine and takes its effect along the intestinal tract. Name this drug:
*a. Nifuroxazide
b. Nalidixic acid
c. Nitroxoline
d. Furadonin (Nitrofurantoin)
e. Furacilin (Nitrofural)
1548. For treatment of enteric infection a 36-year-old woman was prescribed a nitrofuran derivative that is poorly absorbed in the intestine and takes its effect along the intestinal tract. Name this drug:
*a. Nifuroxazide
b. Nitroxoline
c. Furadonin (Nitrofurantoin)
d. Nalidixic acid
e. Furacilin (Nitrofural)
1549. For treatment of enteric infection a 36-year-old woman was prescribed a nitrofuran derivative that is poorly absorbed in the intestine and takes its effect along the intestinal tract. Name this drug:
a. Furacilin (Nitrofural)
*b. Nifuroxazide
c. Nitroxoline
d. Furadonin (Nitrofurantoin)
e. Nalidixic acid
1550. For what substance its dosing is based on the mass, when preparing liquid dosage forms?
a. Ammonia spirit-anise spirit drops
b. Elixir pectoralis
*c. 30% hydrogen peroxide (Perhydrol)
d. Leonurus tincture
e. 1% citral alcohol solution
1551. For what substance its dosing is based on the mass, when preparing liquid dosage forms?
a. Elixir pectoralis
b. 1% citral alcohol solution
c. Ammonia spirit-anise spirit drops
*d. 30% hydrogen peroxide (Perhydrol)
e. Leonurus tincture
1552. For what substance its dosing is based on the mass, when preparing liquid dosage forms?
a. Elixir pectoralis
b. Leonurus tincture
*c. 30% hydrogen peroxide (Perhydrol)
d. Ammonia spirit-anise spirit drops
e. 1% citral alcohol solution
1553. Functional group analysis is widely used to identify organic medicines. What medicine contains phenolic hydroxyl in its structure?
*a. Epinephrine tartrate
b. Papaverine hydrochloride
c. Sulfanilamide
d. Promedol (Trimeperidine)
e. Phenazepam
1554. Functional group analysis is widely used to identify organic medicines. What medicine contains phenolic hydroxyl in its structure?
a. Papaverine hydrochloride
b. Sulfanilamide
c. Phenazepam
*d. Epinephrine tartrate
e. Promedol (Trimeperidine)
1555. Functional group analysis is widely used to identify organic medicines. What medicine contains phenolic hydroxyl in its structure?
a. Papaverine hydrochloride
b. Sulfanilamide
c. Promedol (Trimeperidine)
*d. Epinephrine tartrate
e. Phenazepam
1556. Galenical preparations include:
a. Aerosols
b. Granules
c. Spansules
*d. Tinctures
e. Capsules
1557. Galenical preparations include:
a. Capsules
b. Granules
c. Spansules
d. Aerosols
*e. Tinctures
1558. Galenical preparations include:
a. Granules
*b. Tinctures
c. Capsules
d. Spansules
e. Aerosols
1559. Gastroduodenopathies are one of the most common complications of  pharmacotherapy during treatment with nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. What statement correctly describes the cause of their development?
a. Inhibition of neutrophil aggregation
b. Inhibition of lipid peroxidation
c. Disturbed pain impulse conduction
*d. Inhibition of prostaglandin synthesis in the mucosa
e. Inhibition of platelet adhesion and  aggregation
1560. Gastroduodenopathies are one of the most common complications of  pharmacotherapy during treatment with nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. What statement correctly describes the cause of their development?
a. Inhibition of neutrophil aggregation
b. Inhibition of platelet adhesion and  aggregation
*c. Inhibition of prostaglandin synthesis in the mucosa
d. Inhibition of lipid peroxidation
e. Disturbed pain impulse conduction
1561. Gastroduodenopathies are one of the most common complications of  pharmacotherapy during treatment with nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. What statement correctly describes the cause of their development?
a. Inhibition of platelet adhesion and  aggregation
*b. Inhibition of prostaglandin synthesis in the mucosa
c. Inhibition of neutrophil aggregation
d. Inhibition of lipid peroxidation
e. Disturbed pain impulse conduction
1562. General sedimentation reagents are used to identify alkaloids in an extract obtained from herbal raw materials. Select from the list one such reagent.
*a. Dragendorff reagent
b. Marquis reagent
c. Froehde reagent
d. Vitali-Morin reagent
e. Erdman reagent
1563. General sedimentation reagents are used to identify alkaloids in an extract obtained from herbal raw materials. Select from the list one such reagent.
*a. Dragendorff reagent
b. Vitali-Morin reagent
c. Froehde reagent
d. Marquis reagent
e. Erdman reagent
1564. General sedimentation reagents are used to identify alkaloids in an extract obtained from herbal raw materials. Select from the list one such reagent.
*a. Dragendorff reagent
b. Vitali-Morin reagent
c. Marquis reagent
d. Froehde reagent
e. Erdman reagent
1565. Genetically induced adverse reaction to a certain drug is caused by various enzyme defects. Name this reaction:
*a. Idiosyncrasy
b. Steal syndrome
c. Rebound effect
d. Dysbiosis
e. Withdrawal syndrome
1566. Genetically induced adverse reaction to a certain drug is caused by various enzyme defects. Name this reaction:
a. Rebound effect
b. Steal syndrome
*c. Idiosyncrasy
d. Dysbiosis
e. Withdrawal syndrome
1567. Genetically induced adverse reaction to a certain drug is caused by various enzyme defects. Name this reaction:
a. Steal syndrome
b. Withdrawal syndrome
c. Rebound effect
*d. Idiosyncrasy
e. Dysbiosis
1568. Glucose substance was received for analysis. When heated with copper tartrate reagent (Fehling reagent), it produced a red precipitate, which indicates that its structure contains:
*a. Aldehyde group
b. Phenolic hydroxyl
c. Alcoholic hydroxyl
d. Ester group
e. Amide group
1569. Glucose substance was received for analysis. When heated with copper tartrate reagent (Fehling reagent), it produced a red precipitate, which indicates that its structure contains:
a. Amide group
b. Phenolic hydroxyl
c. Alcoholic hydroxyl
*d. Aldehyde group
e. Ester group
1570. Glucose substance was received for analysis. When heated with copper tartrate reagent (Fehling reagent), it produced a red precipitate, which indicates that its structure contains:
a. Phenolic hydroxyl
b. Amide group
c. Alcoholic hydroxyl
*d. Aldehyde group
e. Ester group
1571. Gum is a polysaccharide substance that contains calcium and magnesium salts of uronic acids and neutral monosaccharides. By solubility arabin, bassorin, and cerasin derivatives can be distinguished. What gum is insoluble in cold water?
*a. Cherry
b. Tragacanth
c. Acacia
d. Apricot
e. Plum
1572. Gum is a polysaccharide substance that contains calcium and magnesium salts of uronic acids and neutral monosaccharides. By solubility arabin, bassorin, and cerasin derivatives can be distinguished. What gum is insoluble in cold water?
a. Apricot
*b. Cherry
c. Acacia
d. Plum
e. Tragacanth
1573. Gum is a polysaccharide substance that contains calcium and magnesium salts of uronic acids and neutral monosaccharides. By solubility arabin, bassorin, and cerasin derivatives can be distinguished. What gum is insoluble in cold water?
a. Tragacanth
b. Plum
c. Apricot
d. Acacia
*e. Cherry
1574. Helichrysum arenarium herbal raw material has anti-inflammatory and choleretic effect. What parts of this plant are harvested?
*a. Flowers
b. Roots
c. Rhizomes
d. Fruits
e. Grass
1575. Helichrysum arenarium herbal raw material has anti-inflammatory and choleretic effect. What parts of this plant are harvested?
a. Grass
b. Roots
*c. Flowers
d. Rhizomes
e. Fruits
1576. Helichrysum arenarium herbal raw material has anti-inflammatory and choleretic effect. What parts of this plant are harvested?
a. Roots
b. Rhizomes
c. Fruits
d. Grass
*e. Flowers
1577. Hemodes and Neohemodes preparations are used as blood plasma substitutes. What is their active substance?
a. Menthol
*b. Polyvinylpyrrolidone
c. Midantan (Amantadine)
d. Thiopental sodium
e. Piracetam
1578. Hemodes and Neohemodes preparations are used as blood plasma substitutes. What is their active substance?
a. Midantan (Amantadine)
b. Menthol
c. Thiopental sodium
d. Piracetam
*e. Polyvinylpyrrolidone
1579. Hemodes and Neohemodes preparations are used as blood plasma substitutes. What is their active substance?
a. Midantan (Amantadine)
b. Thiopental sodium
*c. Polyvinylpyrrolidone
d. Menthol
e. Piracetam
1580. Herbal mixtures contain several types of comminuted or non-comminuted herbal raw material. What stage is textbfNOT a part of herbal mixture production?
*a. Extraction
b. Packing
c. Sifting
d. Mixing
e. Marking
1581. Herbal mixtures contain several types of comminuted or non-comminuted herbal raw material. What stage is textbfNOT a part of herbal mixture production?
*a. Extraction
b. Sifting
c. Marking
d. Packing
e. Mixing
1582. Herbal mixtures contain several types of comminuted or non-comminuted herbal raw material. What stage is textbfNOT a part of herbal mixture production?
a. Sifting
b. Mixing
*c. Extraction
d. Packing
e. Marking
1583. Herbal raw material quality depends on the period when it was harvested. Subterranean organs - roots, rhizomes, subterranean tubers - should be harvested:
a. At the end of the bloom
b. Before the bloom
c. During the period of vegetation
*d. In early spring or autumn
e. During the bloom
1584. Herbal raw material quality depends on the period when it was harvested. Subterranean organs - roots, rhizomes, subterranean tubers - should be harvested:
a. Before the bloom
*b. In early spring or autumn
c. During the bloom
d. During the period of vegetation
e. At the end of the bloom
1585. Hierarchic structure of the Agapetus pharmacy management foresees that authority is being passed on directly from the pharmacy manager to the employees. Specify this type of authority:
a. Functional
b. Divisional
c. Line and staff
*d. Line
e. Matrix
1586. Hierarchic structure of the Agapetus pharmacy management foresees that authority is being passed on directly from the pharmacy manager to the employees. Specify this type of authority:
a. Functional
b. Line and staff
*c. Line
d. Divisional
e. Matrix
1587. Hierarchic structure of the Agapetus pharmacy management foresees that authority is being passed on directly from the pharmacy manager to the employees. Specify this type of authority:
a. Line and staff
*b. Line
c. Functional
d. Matrix
e. Divisional
1588. Highly convincing approach to informing the population about the company and its products, commercial promotion of high use value of the goods and proper conduct of business by the company, actions intended to prompt purchase of goods by both active and potential customers are all characteristic of:
a. Communications
b. Supply
c. Marketing
d. Trademark
*e. Adverticement
1589. Highly convincing approach to informing the population about the company and its products, commercial promotion of high use value of the goods and proper conduct of business by the company, actions intended to prompt purchase of goods by both active and potential customers are all characteristic of:
a. Communications
b. Trademark
c. Marketing
*d. Adverticement
e. Supply
1590. Highly convincing approach to informing the population about the company and its products, commercial promotion of high use value of the goods and proper conduct of business by the company, actions intended to prompt purchase of goods by both active and potential customers are all characteristic of:
a. Trademark
b. Marketing
c. Supply
*d. Adverticement
e. Communications
1591. How are pharmacies classified in Ukraine based on their commercial and manufacturing functions?
a. Pharmacies with centralized and decentralized accounting
*b. Compounding and retail pharmacies
c. Retail and hospital pharmacies
d. Self-financing pharmacies and pharmacies financed from the state budget
e. State, community-owned, and private pharmacies
1592. How are pharmacies classified in Ukraine based on their commercial and manufacturing functions?
a. Self-financing pharmacies and pharmacies financed from the state budget
b. State, community-owned, and private pharmacies
*c. Compounding and retail pharmacies
d. Pharmacies with centralized and decentralized accounting
e. Retail and hospital pharmacies
1593. How are pharmacies classified in Ukraine based on their commercial and manufacturing functions?
a. State, community-owned, and private pharmacies
b. Self-financing pharmacies and pharmacies financed from the state budget
c. Pharmacies with centralized and decentralized accounting
d. Retail and hospital pharmacies
*e. Compounding and retail pharmacies
1594. How long can vasoconstrictors for symptomatic treatment of rhinitis be used?
a. 1 month
b. 5 weeks
c. 2 weeks
d. 3 weeks
*e. 5-7 days
1595. How long can vasoconstrictors for symptomatic treatment of rhinitis be used?
a. 2 weeks
b. 5 weeks
c. 3 weeks
d. 1 month
*e. 5-7 days
1596. How long can vasoconstrictors for symptomatic treatment of rhinitis be used?
a. 3 weeks
b. 1 month
c. 2 weeks
d. 5 weeks
*e. 5-7 days
1597. How long must a pharmacy keep its logbooks with the records about the balance of narcotic drugs, psychotropic substances, and precursors?
*a. 5 years
b. 7 years after the current one
c. 3 years
d. 1 year after the current one
e. 2 years after the current one
1598. How long must a pharmacy keep its logbooks with the records about the balance of narcotic drugs, psychotropic substances, and precursors?
a. 2 years after the current one
*b. 5 years
c. 3 years
d. 7 years after the current one
e. 1 year after the current one
1599. How long must a pharmacy keep its logbooks with the records about the balance of narcotic drugs, psychotropic substances, and precursors?
a. 3 years
b. 1 year after the current one
*c. 5 years
d. 7 years after the current one
e. 2 years after the current one
1600. How long must a pharmacy keep the documents that confirm the fact of sale of medicines and medical products?
*a. 3 years
b. 3 months
c. 5 years
d. 10 years
e. 1 year
1601. How long must a pharmacy keep the documents that confirm the fact of sale of medicines and medical products?
a. 10 years
*b. 3 years
c. 5 years
d. 1 year
e. 3 months
1602. How long should a retail business that deals in medicines keep the quality certificates issued by drug manufacturers?
a. 1 year
*b. 3 years
c. 2 years
d. 6 months
e. 5 years
1603. How long should a retail business that deals in medicines keep the quality certificates issued by drug manufacturers?
a. 2 years
b. 1 year
c. 5 years
*d. 3 years
e. 6 months
1604. How long should a retail business that deals in medicines keep the quality certificates issued by drug manufacturers?
a. 2 years
b. 1 year
c. 5 years
d. 6 months
*e. 3 years
1605. How long should the pharmacy keep a receipt for Morphin-ZN tablets, package №50?
*a. Five years, not counting the current one
b. One year, not counting the current one
c. One month, not counting the current one
d. The receipt form is not kept by the pharmacy
e. Three years, not counting the current one
1606. How long should the pharmacy keep a receipt for Morphin-ZN tablets, package №50?
a. One year, not counting the current one
*b. Five years, not counting the current one
c. One month, not counting the current one
d. Three years, not counting the current one
e. The receipt form is not kept by the pharmacy
1607. How long should the pharmacy keep a receipt for Morphin-ZN tablets, package №50?
a. Three years, not counting the current one
b. The receipt form is not kept by the pharmacy
c. One year, not counting the current one
*d. Five years, not counting the current one
e. One month, not counting the current one
1608. How many mL of nitrofurazone (furacilin) is it necessary to measure out for preparation of 250 mL of nitrofurazone solution (1:5000)?
a. 0.25
b. 0.025
*c. 0.05
d. 0.5
e. 5.0
1609. How many mL of nitrofurazone (furacilin) is it necessary to measure out for preparation of 250 mL of nitrofurazone solution (1:5000)?
a. 0.5
*b. 0.05
c. 0.025
d. 5.0
e. 0.25
1610. How many mL of nitrofurazone (furacilin) is it necessary to measure out for preparation of 250 mL of nitrofurazone solution (1:5000)?
a. 5.0
b. 0.025
*c. 0.05
d. 0.25
e. 0.5
1611. How often should a pharmacy make an inventory of its fixed assets?
a. At least once in a quarter
b. At least twice a year
*c. Once a year
d. Once every three years
e. At least thrice a year
1612. How often should a pharmacy make an inventory of its fixed assets?
a. At least twice a year
b. At least thrice a year
*c. Once a year
d. Once every three years
e. At least once in a quarter
1613. How often should a pharmacy make an inventory of its fixed assets?
a. Once every three years
b. At least thrice a year
c. At least twice a year
d. At least once in a quarter
*e. Once a year
1614. How should the rectal ointments be applied?
a. Apply to the conjunctival mucosa
b. Apply to the nasal mucosa
c. Applied to the external genitalia
*d. Apply to the affected area of the anus
e. Apply to the skin
1615. How should the rectal ointments be applied?
a. Apply to the skin
*b. Apply to the affected area of the anus
c. Applied to the external genitalia
d. Apply to the conjunctival mucosa
e. Apply to the nasal mucosa
1616. How should the rectal ointments be applied?
a. Apply to the skin
b. Apply to the conjunctival mucosa
c. Apply to the nasal mucosa
*d. Apply to the affected area of the anus
e. Applied to the external genitalia
1617. How should the tablets of pancreatin enzyme preparation be taken?
*a. During eating
b. 1 hour after a meal
c. 1 hour before a meal
d. Regardless of food intake
e. 2 hours before a meal
1618. How should the tablets of pancreatin enzyme preparation be taken?
a. 1 hour before a meal
b. Regardless of food intake
c. 1 hour after a meal
*d. During eating
e. 2 hours before a meal
1619. How should the tablets of pancreatin enzyme preparation be taken?
a. 2 hours before a meal
b. Regardless of food intake
c. 1 hour before a meal
*d. During eating
e. 1 hour after a meal
1620. Hydrogen peroxide soultion can be bought in different concentrations in a pharmacy. What concentration should be offered to a patient, if the patient's receipt does not specify hydrogen peroxide concentration?
*a. 3%
b. 20%
c. 30%
d. 2%
e. 10%
1621. Hydrogen peroxide soultion can be bought in different concentrations in a pharmacy. What concentration should be offered to a patient, if the patient's receipt does not specify hydrogen peroxide concentration?
a. 10%
b. 2%
c. 20%
*d. 3%
e. 30%
1622. Hydrogen peroxide soultion can be bought in different concentrations in a pharmacy. What concentration should be offered to a patient, if the patient's receipt does not specify hydrogen peroxide concentration?
a. 30%
b. 20%
c. 10%
d. 2%
*e. 3%
1623. Hydrogen sulfide is being produced in the process of dry pyrolysis of a certain sulfanilamide drug. Name this drug:
a. Sulfacil sodium
*b. Norsulfazole
c. Soluble streptocide
d. Streptocide
e. Sulfadimezinum (Sulfadimine)
1624. Hydrogen sulfide is being produced in the process of dry pyrolysis of a certain sulfanilamide drug. Name this drug:
a. Sulfacil sodium
b. Streptocide
*c. Norsulfazole
d. Soluble streptocide
e. Sulfadimezinum (Sulfadimine)
1625. Hydrogen sulfide is being produced in the process of dry pyrolysis of a certain sulfanilamide drug. Name this drug:
a. Sulfacil sodium
b. Streptocide
c. Sulfadimezinum (Sulfadimine)
d. Soluble streptocide
*e. Norsulfazole
1626. Hyoscyamine and scopolamine are typically contained in the plants of the following family:
a. Apocynaceae
*b. Solanaceae
c. Asteraceae
d. Papaveraceae
e. Fabaceae
1627. Hyoscyamine and scopolamine are typically contained in the plants of the following family:
a. Asteraceae
*b. Solanaceae
c. Fabaceae
d. Papaveraceae
e. Apocynaceae
1628. Hyoscyamine and scopolamine are typically contained in the plants of the following family:
a. Fabaceae
b. Asteraceae
c. Papaveraceae
*d. Solanaceae
e. Apocynaceae
1629. Hypericum perforatum grass contains hypericin. What is the pharmacological effect of this substance?
a. Analgesic
b. Antiasthmatic
*c. Antidepressant
d. Expectorant
e. Anticonvulsant
1630. Hypericum perforatum grass contains hypericin. What is the pharmacological effect of this substance?
a. Analgesic
b. Anticonvulsant
c. Expectorant
d. Antiasthmatic
*e. Antidepressant
1631. Hypericum perforatum grass contains hypericin. What is the pharmacological effect of this substance?
a. Antiasthmatic
b. Analgesic
c. Anticonvulsant
d. Expectorant
*e. Antidepressant
1632. Identification of organic medicinal substances requires the analysis of their functional groups. To identify medicinal substances that are benzoates, an analytical chemist should use:
a. Potassium hydroxide solution
*b. Iron(III) chloride solution
c. Sodium acetate solution
d. Ammonium chloride solution
e. Sodium bicarbonate solution
1633. Identification of organic medicinal substances requires the analysis of their functional groups. To identify medicinal substances that are benzoates, an analytical chemist should use:
a. Potassium hydroxide solution
b. Ammonium chloride solution
c. Sodium bicarbonate solution
d. Sodium acetate solution
*e. Iron(III) chloride solution
1634. Identification of organic medicinal substances requires the analysis of their functional groups. To identify medicinal substances that are benzoates, an analytical chemist should use:
a. Sodium acetate solution
b. Potassium hydroxide solution
c. Ammonium chloride solution
*d. Iron(III) chloride solution
e. Sodium bicarbonate solution
1635. Identification of potassium iodide requires performing an oxidation reaction in acid medium, which produces free iodine that colors chloroform layer. What reagent is used for such a reaction?
*a. Sodium nitrite
b. Ammonium oxalate
c. Barium chloride
d. Silver nitrate
e. Sodium carbonate
1636. Identification of potassium iodide requires performing an oxidation reaction in acid medium, which produces free iodine that colors chloroform layer. What reagent is used for such a reaction?
a. Silver nitrate
b. Sodium carbonate
c. Ammonium oxalate
*d. Sodium nitrite
e. Barium chloride
1637. Identification of potassium iodide requires performing an oxidation reaction in acid medium, which produces free iodine that colors chloroform layer. What reagent is used for such a reaction?
a. Sodium carbonate
b. Silver nitrate
*c. Sodium nitrite
d. Ammonium oxalate
e. Barium chloride
1638. If a pharmacy plans to temporarily close for repairs or re-equipment, the State Service of Ukraine on Medicines and Drugs Control must be notified in advance no later than:
*a. 10 working days before the closure
b. Notification is optional
c. 1 month before the closure
d. 20 working days before the closure
e. 3 months before the closure
1639. If a pharmacy plans to temporarily close for repairs or re-equipment, the State Service of Ukraine on Medicines and Drugs Control must be notified in advance no later than:
a. Notification is optional
*b. 10 working days before the closure
c. 20 working days before the closure
d. 1 month before the closure
e. 3 months before the closure
1640. If a pharmacy plans to temporarily close for repairs or re-equipment, the State Service of Ukraine on Medicines and Drugs Control must be notified in advance no later than:
a. Notification is optional
*b. 10 working days before the closure
c. 20 working days before the closure
d. 3 months before the closure
e. 1 month before the closure
1641. If potassium salts are put into the colorless flame of a gas burner, the flame colors:
a. Brick-red
*b. Violet
c. Yellow
d. Green
e. Red
1642. If potassium salts are put into the colorless flame of a gas burner, the flame colors:
a. Red
*b. Violet
c. Yellow
d. Green
e. Brick-red
1643. If potassium salts are put into the colorless flame of a gas burner, the flame colors:
a. Red
b. Brick-red
c. Green
*d. Violet
e. Yellow
1644. If vehicle is not specified, an eye ointment should be prepared with the following sterile vehicle:
*a. 10 parts of anhydrous lanolin  - 90 parts of vaseline For Eye Ointments
b. 30 parts of lanolin - 70 parts of vaseline
c. Lanolin: vaseline - 1:1
d. Vaseline For Eye Ointments
e. 40 parts of anhydrous lanolin  - 60 parts of vaseline For Eye Ointments
1645. If vehicle is not specified, an eye ointment should be prepared with the following sterile vehicle:
a. Lanolin: vaseline - 1:1
b. 40 parts of anhydrous lanolin  - 60 parts of vaseline For Eye Ointments
c. Vaseline For Eye Ointments
d. 30 parts of lanolin - 70 parts of vaseline
*e. 10 parts of anhydrous lanolin  - 90 parts of vaseline For Eye Ointments
1646. If vehicle is not specified, an eye ointment should be prepared with the following sterile vehicle:
a. Vaseline For Eye Ointments
b. 40 parts of anhydrous lanolin  - 60 parts of vaseline For Eye Ointments
*c. 10 parts of anhydrous lanolin  - 90 parts of vaseline For Eye Ointments
d. Lanolin: vaseline - 1:1
e. 30 parts of lanolin - 70 parts of vaseline
1647. In Ukraine the auditor position eligibility requires the candidate to be a Ukrainian citizen and have the qualification certificate for work as an auditor within the Ukraine's territory. The certificate is effective for:
*a. 5 years
b. Indefinitely
c. 1 years
d. 3 years
e. 2 years
1648. In Ukraine the auditor position eligibility requires the candidate to be a Ukrainian citizen and have the qualification certificate for work as an auditor within the Ukraine's territory. The certificate is effective for:
a. 3 years
b. 2 years
*c. 5 years
d. Indefinitely
e. 1 years
1649. In Ukraine the auditor position eligibility requires the candidate to be a Ukrainian citizen and have the qualification certificate for work as an auditor within the Ukraine's territory. The certificate is effective for:
a. Indefinitely
*b. 5 years
c. 3 years
d. 1 years
e. 2 years
1650. In a pharmacy each employee is subordinate to only one manager, who makes all the management decisions. What type of organizational structure of the pharmacy's management is it?
*a. Linear
b. Functional
c. Matrix
d. Productive
e. Adaptive
1651. In a pharmacy each employee is subordinate to only one manager, who makes all the management decisions. What type of organizational structure of the pharmacy's management is it?
a. Matrix
b. Functional
c. Adaptive
d. Productive
*e. Linear
1652. In a pharmacy each employee is subordinate to only one manager, who makes all the management decisions. What type of organizational structure of the pharmacy's management is it?
a. Matrix
b. Functional
c. Productive
*d. Linear
e. Adaptive
1653. In his line of work a dispensing chemist tries to satisfy a number of contradictory requirements, which has resulted in emotional overload, stress, and self-doubt. What type of conflict has arisen in this case?
*a. Intrapersonal
b. -
c. Individual vs. group
d. Interorganizational
e. Intergroup
1654. In his line of work a dispensing chemist tries to satisfy a number of contradictory requirements, which has resulted in emotional overload, stress, and self-doubt. What type of conflict has arisen in this case?
*a. Intrapersonal
b. Individual vs. group
c. Intergroup
d. -
e. Interorganizational
1655. In his line of work a dispensing chemist tries to satisfy a number of contradictory requirements, which has resulted in emotional overload, stress, and self-doubt. What type of conflict has arisen in this case?
a. Interorganizational
b. Individual vs. group
*c. Intrapersonal
d. Intergroup
e. -
1656. In his management policy, the head manager of the <<Health Formula>> pharmacy actively uses planning, material incentives and sanctions, pricing, and distribution of profits and capital investments. These means and approaches belong to the following group of management methods:
a. Organizational management methods
*b. Economic management methods
c. Legal management methods
d. Indirect control methods
e. Psychosocial management methods
1657. In his management policy, the head manager of the <<Health Formula>> pharmacy actively uses planning, material incentives and sanctions, pricing, and distribution of profits and capital investments. These means and approaches belong to the following group of management methods:
a. Organizational management methods
b. Indirect control methods
c. Psychosocial management methods
*d. Economic management methods
e. Legal management methods
1658. In his management policy, the head manager of the <<Health Formula>> pharmacy actively uses planning, material incentives and sanctions, pricing, and distribution of profits and capital investments. These means and approaches belong to the following group of management methods:
a. Psychosocial management methods
*b. Economic management methods
c. Legal management methods
d. Indirect control methods
e. Organizational management methods
1659. In its work, a pharmaceutical company combines ensuring its own profitability with meeting the needs of consumers and raising the standard of living in the society. What marketing management concept has the company chosen?
*a. Socio-ethical marketing
b. Intensification of commercial efforts
c. Marketing
d. Production improvement
e. Product improvement
1660. In its work, a pharmaceutical company combines ensuring its own profitability with meeting the needs of consumers and raising the standard of living in the society. What marketing management concept has the company chosen?
a. Product improvement
b. Marketing
c. Intensification of commercial efforts
*d. Socio-ethical marketing
e. Production improvement
1661. In its work, a pharmaceutical company combines ensuring its own profitability with meeting the needs of consumers and raising the standard of living in the society. What marketing management concept has the company chosen?
a. Production improvement
b. Intensification of commercial efforts
*c. Socio-ethical marketing
d. Marketing
e. Product improvement
1662. In production of extraction drugs with maximum purity level, the extracts are purified using the method of liquid-liquid extraction, which is the process of:
a. Dialysis
b. Heating the extract
c. Electrolyte action
d. Ultrasound exposure
*e. Extraction from one liquid using  another
1663. In production of extraction drugs with maximum purity level, the extracts are purified using the method of liquid-liquid extraction, which is the process of:
a. Dialysis
b. Heating the extract
c. Ultrasound exposure
*d. Extraction from one liquid using  another
e. Electrolyte action
1664. In production of extraction drugs with maximum purity level, the extracts are purified using the method of liquid-liquid extraction, which is the process of:
a. Heating the extract
*b. Extraction from one liquid using  another
c. Electrolyte action
d. Ultrasound exposure
e. Dialysis
1665. In production of phytodrugs, the extractant that remains in the herbal raw material is removed and used again in manufacturing. Name this process:
a. Lyophilization
b. Extraction
c. Rectification
*d. Recuperation
e. Sublimation
1666. In production of phytodrugs, the extractant that remains in the herbal raw material is removed and used again in manufacturing. Name this process:
a. Rectification
*b. Recuperation
c. Lyophilization
d. Extraction
e. Sublimation
1667. In production of phytodrugs, the extractant that remains in the herbal raw material is removed and used again in manufacturing. Name this process:
a. Rectification
b. Lyophilization
c. Sublimation
*d. Recuperation
e. Extraction
1668. In the course of its development a pharmaceutical company forms its culture. Culture of a pharmaceutical company is typically based on:
*a. Values, traditions, and behavioral norms characteristic of company employees
b. License agreement
c. Relevant pharmaceutical practices
d. Specifics of manufacturing process
e. Legislation in force
1669. In the course of its development a pharmaceutical company forms its culture. Culture of a pharmaceutical company is typically based on:
a. Legislation in force
b. Relevant pharmaceutical practices
*c. Values, traditions, and behavioral norms characteristic of company employees
d. Specifics of manufacturing process
e. License agreement
1670. In the course of its development a pharmaceutical company forms its culture. Culture of a pharmaceutical company is typically based on:
a. Legislation in force
b. Specifics of manufacturing process
c. Relevant pharmaceutical practices
d. License agreement
*e. Values, traditions, and behavioral norms characteristic of company employees
1671. In the course of the pharmacotherapy for exacerbation of chronic bronchitis, the patient developed dyspeptic disorders, photodermatitis, and disturbed hepatic function. Which of the prescribed drugs could have caused these signs?
a. Ambroxol
b. Codeine phosphate
*c. Doxycycline
d. Ascorbic acid
e. Acetylcysteine
1672. In the course of the pharmacotherapy for exacerbation of chronic bronchitis, the patient developed dyspeptic disorders, photodermatitis, and disturbed hepatic function. Which of the prescribed drugs could have caused these signs?
a. Ascorbic acid
b. Codeine phosphate
c. Ambroxol
d. Acetylcysteine
*e. Doxycycline
1673. In the course of the pharmacotherapy for exacerbation of chronic bronchitis, the patient developed dyspeptic disorders, photodermatitis, and disturbed hepatic function. Which of the prescribed drugs could have caused these signs?
a. Codeine phosphate
*b. Doxycycline
c. Acetylcysteine
d. Ascorbic acid
e. Ambroxol
1674. In the process of drug identification, an analytical chemist of the State Inspection for Quality Control of Medicines performs ninhydrin test. What drug is being identified?
a. Nitrofural
b. Sulfamethoxazole
c. Retinol acetate
d. Resorcin
*e. Tyrosine
1675. In the process of drug identification, an analytical chemist of the State Inspection for Quality Control of Medicines performs ninhydrin test. What drug is being identified?
a. Retinol acetate
*b. Tyrosine
c. Resorcin
d. Sulfamethoxazole
e. Nitrofural
1676. In the process of drug identification, an analytical chemist of the State Inspection for Quality Control of Medicines performs ninhydrin test. What drug is being identified?
a. Sulfamethoxazole
*b. Tyrosine
c. Nitrofural
d. Retinol acetate
e. Resorcin
1677. In the process of industrial production of rectal suppositories, certain substances insoluble both in water and suppository vehicle are introduced into this dosage form. Specify the optimal way to introduce these substances:
*a. Introduce the substances as a suspension
b. Dissolve the substances in the water heated to 45^oC
c. Melt all of fatty vehicle and dissolve the substances there
d. Introduce the substances as an emulsion
e. Melt a part of fatty vehicle and dissolve the substances there
1678. In the process of industrial production of rectal suppositories, certain substances insoluble both in water and suppository vehicle are introduced into this dosage form. Specify the optimal way to introduce these substances:
a. Introduce the substances as an emulsion
b. Melt a part of fatty vehicle and dissolve the substances there
c. Melt all of fatty vehicle and dissolve the substances there
*d. Introduce the substances as a suspension
e. Dissolve the substances in the water heated to 45^oC
1679. In the process of industrial production of rectal suppositories, certain substances insoluble both in water and suppository vehicle are introduced into this dosage form. Specify the optimal way to introduce these substances:
a. Melt a part of fatty vehicle and dissolve the substances there
b. Dissolve the substances in the water heated to 45^oC
c. Introduce the substances as an emulsion
*d. Introduce the substances as a suspension
e. Melt all of fatty vehicle and dissolve the substances there
1680. In the process of industrial production, certain adjuvants are included in the soft dosage forms as pH regulators. Name these adjuvants:
a. Benzalkonium chloride, benzyl alcohol
*b. Citric acid, sodium phosphate salts
c. Glycerine, dimethyl sulfoxide
d. Sodium lauryl sulfate, tween emulsifiers
e. Paraffin, spermaceti
1681. In the process of industrial production, certain adjuvants are included in the soft dosage forms as pH regulators. Name these adjuvants:
a. Benzalkonium chloride, benzyl alcohol
b. Sodium lauryl sulfate, tween emulsifiers
*c. Citric acid, sodium phosphate salts
d. Paraffin, spermaceti
e. Glycerine, dimethyl sulfoxide
1682. In the process of industrial production, certain adjuvants are included in the soft dosage forms as pH regulators. Name these adjuvants:
a. Glycerine, dimethyl sulfoxide
*b. Citric acid, sodium phosphate salts
c. Sodium lauryl sulfate, tween emulsifiers
d. Benzalkonium chloride, benzyl alcohol
e. Paraffin, spermaceti
1683. In the process of inpatient treatment of bronchial asthma, the patient was prescribed Euphylline (Theophylline) intravenously. What side effect of this drug must be managed first?
*a. Cardiotoxicity
b. Nephrotoxicity
c. Hematotoxicity
d. Chondrotoxicity
e. Hepatotoxicity
1684. In the process of inpatient treatment of bronchial asthma, the patient was prescribed Euphylline (Theophylline) intravenously. What side effect of this drug must be managed first?
a. Hematotoxicity
*b. Cardiotoxicity
c. Nephrotoxicity
d. Chondrotoxicity
e. Hepatotoxicity
1685. In the process of inpatient treatment of bronchial asthma, the patient was prescribed Euphylline (Theophylline) intravenously. What side effect of this drug must be managed first?
a. Hepatotoxicity
b. Nephrotoxicity
*c. Cardiotoxicity
d. Hematotoxicity
e. Chondrotoxicity
1686. In the process of isoniazid identification a pharmacy analyst thoroughly boiled the substance with 2,4-dinitrochlorobenzene. The substance turned yellow. After adding alkaline solution the substance turned first violet and then brownish-red. As the result of this reaction the following aldehyde derivative is produced:
a. Gluconic
b. Glutamic
c. Glyoxylic
*d. Glutaconic
e. Hexanic
1687. In the process of isoniazid identification a pharmacy analyst thoroughly boiled the substance with 2,4-dinitrochlorobenzene. The substance turned yellow. After adding alkaline solution the substance turned first violet and then brownish-red. As the result of this reaction the following aldehyde derivative is produced:
a. Hexanic
b. Glutamic
*c. Glutaconic
d. Glyoxylic
e. Gluconic
1688. In the process of isoniazid identification a pharmacy analyst thoroughly boiled the substance with 2,4-dinitrochlorobenzene. The substance turned yellow. After adding alkaline solution the substance turned first violet and then brownish-red. As the result of this reaction the following aldehyde derivative is produced:
a. Hexanic
b. Glyoxylic
*c. Glutaconic
d. Gluconic
e. Glutamic
1689. In the process of making an aqueous solution of protargol the pharmacist  has used the following technology:
*a. Added the powder onto the water surface and waited until complete dissolution
b. Dissolved during comminution
c. Dissolved in purified water in a vial for dispensing
d. Dissolved in warm water
e. Dissolved in cold water
1690. In the process of making an aqueous solution of protargol the pharmacist  has used the following technology:
a. Dissolved during comminution
b. Dissolved in warm water
*c. Added the powder onto the water surface and waited until complete dissolution
d. Dissolved in cold water
e. Dissolved in purified water in a vial for dispensing
1691. In the process of making an aqueous solution of protargol the pharmacist  has used the following technology:
a. Dissolved in purified water in a vial for dispensing
b. Dissolved in cold water
c. Dissolved during comminution
*d. Added the powder onto the water surface and waited until complete dissolution
e. Dissolved in warm water
1692. In the process of packing and transporting, herbal raw material often becomes partially comminuted or even powdered. Excessive comminution has negative effect on the herbal raw material appearance and its quality. What tool is used to separate these excessively comminuted particles from the rest of the herbal raw material?
*a. Sieve
b. Mortars
c. Tweezers
d. Filter
e. Scalpel
1693. In the process of packing and transporting, herbal raw material often becomes partially comminuted or even powdered. Excessive comminution has negative effect on the herbal raw material appearance and its quality. What tool is used to separate these excessively comminuted particles from the rest of the herbal raw material?
a. Filter
b. Mortars
*c. Sieve
d. Scalpel
e. Tweezers
1694. In the process of packing and transporting, herbal raw material often becomes partially comminuted or even powdered. Excessive comminution has negative effect on the herbal raw material appearance and its quality. What tool is used to separate these excessively comminuted particles from the rest of the herbal raw material?
a. Mortars
b. Scalpel
*c. Sieve
d. Tweezers
e. Filter
1695. In the process of pharmaceutical company entering an offshore market the traditions and customs, religion, system of values, and education level of the local population were analyzed. What factors of international marketing environment were researched?
*a. Sociocultural
b. Technological
c. Political
d. Economical
e. Legal
1696. In the process of pharmaceutical company entering an offshore market the traditions and customs, religion, system of values, and education level of the local population were analyzed. What factors of international marketing environment were researched?
a. Economical
*b. Sociocultural
c. Technological
d. Legal
e. Political
1697. In the process of pharmaceutical company entering an offshore market the traditions and customs, religion, system of values, and education level of the local population were analyzed. What factors of international marketing environment were researched?
a. Technological
b. Economical
c. Legal
*d. Sociocultural
e. Political
1698. In the process of phytochemical examination of buckthorn bark, the reaction with alkaline solution resulted in red coloring, which indicates the presence of the following:
a. Alkaloids
b. Flavonoids
c. Saponins
*d. Anthracene derivatives
e. Slime
1699. In the process of phytochemical examination of buckthorn bark, the reaction with alkaline solution resulted in red coloring, which indicates the presence of the following:
a. Slime
*b. Anthracene derivatives
c. Alkaloids
d. Flavonoids
e. Saponins
1700. In the process of phytochemical examination of buckthorn bark, the reaction with alkaline solution resulted in red coloring, which indicates the presence of the following:
a. Slime
b. Alkaloids
c. Flavonoids
d. Saponins
*e. Anthracene derivatives
1701. In the process of price formation, a pharmaceutical company takes into account both internal and external factors. What factor is an external one?
*a. State regulation of price formation
b. Marketing goals of the company
c. The stage of the product life cycle
d. Manufacturing costs
e. Marketing strategy of the company
1702. In the process of price formation, a pharmaceutical company takes into account both internal and external factors. What factor is an external one?
a. Manufacturing costs
*b. State regulation of price formation
c. The stage of the product life cycle
d. Marketing strategy of the company
e. Marketing goals of the company
1703. In what capacity is benzyl alcohol used as a component of solutions for parenteral administration?
a. Antioxidant
b. pH regulator
c. Isotonicity regulator
*d. Antimicrobial preservative
e. Buffer solution
1704. In what capacity is benzyl alcohol used as a component of solutions for parenteral administration?
a. Buffer solution
b. Antioxidant
c. pH regulator
*d. Antimicrobial preservative
e. Isotonicity regulator
1705. In what capacity is benzyl alcohol used as a component of solutions for parenteral administration?
a. Isotonicity regulator
b. Antioxidant
*c. Antimicrobial preservative
d. pH regulator
e. Buffer solution
1706. In what order must alcohol-containing solutions be added into aqueous solutions during the preparation of liquid dosage forms?
a. In any order
*b. In the order of increasing alcohol concentration
c. In the order of increasing volume of alcohol-containing solutions
d. First into the vial for dispensing
e. In the order of decreasing alcohol concentration
1707. In what order must alcohol-containing solutions be added into aqueous solutions during the preparation of liquid dosage forms?
a. In the order of decreasing alcohol concentration
*b. In the order of increasing alcohol concentration
c. In any order
d. First into the vial for dispensing
e. In the order of increasing volume of alcohol-containing solutions
1708. In what order must alcohol-containing solutions be added into aqueous solutions during the preparation of liquid dosage forms?
a. In the order of decreasing alcohol concentration
b. First into the vial for dispensing
c. In any order
d. In the order of increasing volume of alcohol-containing solutions
*e. In the order of increasing alcohol concentration
1709. Incoming medicines inspection is performed by an authorized employee. What is textbfNOT a part of the responsibilities of this person?
a. -
b. To keep a roster of incoming medicines
c. To check the pharmacy stock for low-quality or fake medicines
d. To draw up conclusions regarding inspection of  incoming medicines
*e. To draw up orders for medicines and medical products, to conclude sales contracts
1710. Incoming medicines inspection is performed by an authorized employee. What is textbfNOT a part of the responsibilities of this person?
a. To draw up conclusions regarding inspection of  incoming medicines
b. -
*c. To draw up orders for medicines and medical products, to conclude sales contracts
d. To check the pharmacy stock for low-quality or fake medicines
e. To keep a roster of incoming medicines
1711. Incoming medicines inspection is performed by an authorized employee. What is textbfNOT a part of the responsibilities of this person?
a. To draw up conclusions regarding inspection of  incoming medicines
b. To check the pharmacy stock for low-quality or fake medicines
*c. To draw up orders for medicines and medical products, to conclude sales contracts
d. -
e. To keep a roster of incoming medicines
1712. Indometacine is a nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug. A condensed heterocyclic system is contained within the structure of this drug. What cycles compose the system?
*a. Pyrrole and benzene
b. Benzene and pyridine
c. Benzene and thiazole
d. Pyrimidine and imidazole
e. Two 4-oxycoumarin residues
1713. Indometacine is a nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug. A condensed heterocyclic system is contained within the structure of this drug. What cycles compose the system?
a. Benzene and pyridine
*b. Pyrrole and benzene
c. Benzene and thiazole
d. Two 4-oxycoumarin residues
e. Pyrimidine and imidazole
1714. Indometacine is a nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug. A condensed heterocyclic system is contained within the structure of this drug. What cycles compose the system?
a. Benzene and pyridine
b. Two 4-oxycoumarin residues
c. Benzene and thiazole
d. Pyrimidine and imidazole
*e. Pyrrole and benzene
1715. Information on the pharmacy's actual stock of narcotic drugs, psychotropic substances, and precursors must be checked against the balance records made in the relevant logbook. How often must it be done?
*a. Monthly
b. Annually
c. Daily
d. -
e. Quarterly
1716. Information on the pharmacy's actual stock of narcotic drugs, psychotropic substances, and precursors must be checked against the balance records made in the relevant logbook. How often must it be done?
*a. Monthly
b. Quarterly
c. Annually
d. Daily
e. -
1717. Information on the pharmacy's actual stock of narcotic drugs, psychotropic substances, and precursors must be checked against the balance records made in the relevant logbook. How often must it be done?
a. -
b. Quarterly
c. Annually
*d. Monthly
e. Daily
1718. Infuser apparatus is used by a pharmacy to prepare:
a. Emulsions
b. Infusion solutions
c. Suspensions
d. Ointments
*e. Infusions and decoctions
1719. Infuser apparatus is used by a pharmacy to prepare:
a. Ointments
*b. Infusions and decoctions
c. Infusion solutions
d. Emulsions
e. Suspensions
1720. Infuser apparatus is used by a pharmacy to prepare:
a. Ointments
b. Emulsions
*c. Infusions and decoctions
d. Suspensions
e. Infusion solutions
1721. Infusion of Althaea roots is being prepared for a patient. What pattern of infusion should be chosen in this case?
*a. 30 minutes at room temperature
b. 30 minutes of water bath infusion and 10 minutes of cooling at room temperature
c. 15 minutes of water bath infusion and 45 minutes of cooling at room temperature
d. 30 minutes of water bath infusion and immediate filtering without cooling
e. 60 minutes at room temperature
1722. Infusion of Althaea roots is being prepared for a patient. What pattern of infusion should be chosen in this case?
a. 15 minutes of water bath infusion and 45 minutes of cooling at room temperature
*b. 30 minutes at room temperature
c. 30 minutes of water bath infusion and immediate filtering without cooling
d. 30 minutes of water bath infusion and 10 minutes of cooling at room temperature
e. 60 minutes at room temperature
1723. Infusion of Althaea roots is being prepared for a patient. What pattern of infusion should be chosen in this case?
a. 30 minutes of water bath infusion and immediate filtering without cooling
b. 15 minutes of water bath infusion and 45 minutes of cooling at room temperature
c. 60 minutes at room temperature
d. 30 minutes of water bath infusion and 10 minutes of cooling at room temperature
*e. 30 minutes at room temperature
1724. Infusions of herbal raw material rich in essential oils should be:
*a. Prepared in a tightly closed vessel
b. Immediately filtered
c. Acidated with hydrochloric acid
d. Infused cold
e. Filtered without wringing of the solid residue
1725. Infusions of herbal raw material rich in essential oils should be:
a. Acidated with hydrochloric acid
b. Infused cold
c. Filtered without wringing of the solid residue
*d. Prepared in a tightly closed vessel
e. Immediately filtered
1726. Infusions of herbal raw material rich in essential oils should be:
a. Infused cold
b. Acidated with hydrochloric acid
c. Immediately filtered
d. Filtered without wringing of the solid residue
*e. Prepared in a tightly closed vessel
1727. Injection solutions are being produced in an ampoule workshop. Injection solution of ascorbic acid belongs to the following group of solutions:
*a. Easily oxidized solutions
b. Solutions of the salts formed by weak bases and strong acids
c. Solutions of the substances that cannot be thermally sterilized
d. Solutions of the salts formed by strong bases and weak acids
e. Solutions of the substances that need special purification
1728. Injection solutions are being produced in an ampoule workshop. Injection solution of ascorbic acid belongs to the following group of solutions:
*a. Easily oxidized solutions
b. Solutions of the salts formed by weak bases and strong acids
c. Solutions of the substances that cannot be thermally sterilized
d. Solutions of the substances that need special purification
e. Solutions of the salts formed by strong bases and weak acids
1729. Injection solutions are being produced in an ampoule workshop. Injection solution of ascorbic acid belongs to the following group of solutions:
a. Solutions of the substances that need special purification
*b. Easily oxidized solutions
c. Solutions of the salts formed by weak bases and strong acids
d. Solutions of the substances that cannot be thermally sterilized
e. Solutions of the salts formed by strong bases and weak acids
1730. Inorganic medicines are identified by their cations and anions. What should be used by an analytical chemist for identification of medicinal substances that contain potassium?
*a. Tartaric acid solution
b. Benzoic acid solution
c. Nitric acid solution
d. Acetic acid solution
e. Hydrochloric acid solution
1731. Inorganic medicines are identified by their cations and anions. What should be used by an analytical chemist for identification of medicinal substances that contain potassium?
*a. Tartaric acid solution
b. Nitric acid solution
c. Acetic acid solution
d. Hydrochloric acid solution
e. Benzoic acid solution
1732. Inorganic medicines are identified by their cations and anions. What should be used by an analytical chemist for identification of medicinal substances that contain potassium?
a. Nitric acid solution
b. Hydrochloric acid solution
*c. Tartaric acid solution
d. Acetic acid solution
e. Benzoic acid solution
1733. Inulin improves digestion and has a positive effect on carbohydrate metabolism. What plant is used as a source of inulin?
*a. Helianthus tuberosus
b. Althaea officinalis
c. Hypericum maculatum
d. Astragalus dasyanthus
e. Brassica juncea
1734. Inulin improves digestion and has a positive effect on carbohydrate metabolism. What plant is used as a source of inulin?
*a. Helianthus tuberosus
b. Hypericum maculatum
c. Althaea officinalis
d. Brassica juncea
e. Astragalus dasyanthus
1735. Inulin improves digestion and has a positive effect on carbohydrate metabolism. What plant is used as a source of inulin?
a. Althaea officinalis
b. Astragalus dasyanthus
*c. Helianthus tuberosus
d. Brassica juncea
e. Hypericum maculatum
1736. Iridoids can be divided into four main groups. What is the common name for the iridoids obtained from the Valerianaсeae family plants?
*a. Valepotriates
b. Complex iridoid alkaloids
c. Cyclopentane iridoids
d. Common iridoids
e. Secoiridoids
1737. Iridoids can be divided into four main groups. What is the common name for the iridoids obtained from the Valerianaсeae family plants?
a. Common iridoids
b. Secoiridoids
*c. Valepotriates
d. Cyclopentane iridoids
e. Complex iridoid alkaloids
1738. Iridoids can be divided into four main groups. What is the common name for the iridoids obtained from the Valerianaсeae family plants?
a. Cyclopentane iridoids
*b. Valepotriates
c. Common iridoids
d. Secoiridoids
e. Complex iridoid alkaloids
1739. Lately the Phytopharm pharmaceutical company has been forced to decrease its production volume and range of goods. Not only does the company head manager demonstrate no managerial abilities, but he also appears to be completely disinterested in the running of the business and executes no control over it. Determine the leadership type of the head manager in this case:
a. Autocratic
b. Democratic
c. Authoritarian
*d. Liberal
e. Directive
1740. Lately the Phytopharm pharmaceutical company has been forced to decrease its production volume and range of goods. Not only does the company head manager demonstrate no managerial abilities, but he also appears to be completely disinterested in the running of the business and executes no control over it. Determine the leadership type of the head manager in this case:
a. Democratic
b. Authoritarian
*c. Liberal
d. Directive
e. Autocratic
1741. Lately the Phytopharm pharmaceutical company has been forced to decrease its production volume and range of goods. Not only does the company head manager demonstrate no managerial abilities, but he also appears to be completely disinterested in the running of the business and executes no control over it. Determine the leadership type of the head manager in this case:
a. Democratic
b. Directive
*c. Liberal
d. Autocratic
e. Authoritarian
1742. Licorice roots contain saponins. What reaction can prove their presence in the herbal raw material?
a. Fehling's test
b. Dragendorff's test
c. Reaction with iron(III) chloride
d. Molisch's test
*e. Foaming reaction
1743. Licorice roots contain saponins. What reaction can prove their presence in the herbal raw material?
a. Molisch's test
b. Dragendorff's test
c. Reaction with iron(III) chloride
*d. Foaming reaction
e. Fehling's test
1744. Licorice roots contain saponins. What reaction can prove their presence in the herbal raw material?
a. Reaction with iron(III) chloride
b. Fehling's test
c. Molisch's test
*d. Foaming reaction
e. Dragendorff's test
1745. Limit cash balance is the maximum amount of monetary funds that can remain in the cash desk of an organization at the end of a workday. This limit is established by the following authorities:
*a. Pharmacy management
b. Chief physician
c. Local authorities
d. -
e. Tax Inspectorate
1746. Limit cash balance is the maximum amount of monetary funds that can remain in the cash desk of an organization at the end of a workday. This limit is established by the following authorities:
a. -
*b. Pharmacy management
c. Tax Inspectorate
d. Local authorities
e. Chief physician
1747. Limit cash balance is the maximum amount of monetary funds that can remain in the cash desk of an organization at the end of a workday. This limit is established by the following authorities:
a. Tax Inspectorate
b. -
c. Chief physician
*d. Pharmacy management
e. Local authorities
1748. Lipophilicity is very important for the bioavailability of a substance. Name the numerical parameter that characterizes lipophilicity.
a. Coefficient of surface tension
*b. Distribution coefficient
c. Coefficient of viscosity
d. Correction factor
e. Stoichiometric coefficient
1749. Lipophilicity is very important for the bioavailability of a substance. Name the numerical parameter that characterizes lipophilicity.
a. Coefficient of viscosity
b. Correction factor
*c. Distribution coefficient
d. Stoichiometric coefficient
e. Coefficient of surface tension
1750. Lipophilicity is very important for the bioavailability of a substance. Name the numerical parameter that characterizes lipophilicity.
a. Correction factor
b. Stoichiometric coefficient
c. Coefficient of viscosity
d. Coefficient of surface tension
*e. Distribution coefficient
1751. Local anesthetic benzocaine can be identified using the reaction of iron(III) hydroxamate formation. What functional group makes it possible to conduct this reaction?
a. Aldehyde group
*b. Esther group
c. Sulfamide group
d. Ketone group
e. Carboxylic group
1752. Local anesthetic benzocaine can be identified using the reaction of iron(III) hydroxamate formation. What functional group makes it possible to conduct this reaction?
a. Aldehyde group
b. Carboxylic group
c. Ketone group
*d. Esther group
e. Sulfamide group
1753. Local anesthetic benzocaine can be identified using the reaction of iron(III) hydroxamate formation. What functional group makes it possible to conduct this reaction?
a. Carboxylic group
*b. Esther group
c. Sulfamide group
d. Aldehyde group
e. Ketone group
1754. Local anesthetics can fall into different chemical classes. Benzocaine is a drug that belongs to:
a. Aromatic amino-aldehydes
*b. Aromatic amino acid esters
c. Aromatic ketones
d. Aromatic amino acid amides
e. Aromatic sulfo acid amides
1755. Local anesthetics can fall into different chemical classes. Benzocaine is a drug that belongs to:
a. Aromatic ketones
b. Aromatic sulfo acid amides
c. Aromatic amino-aldehydes
d. Aromatic amino acid amides
*e. Aromatic amino acid esters
1756. Local anesthetics can fall into different chemical classes. Benzocaine is a drug that belongs to:
a. Aromatic sulfo acid amides
b. Aromatic ketones
*c. Aromatic amino acid esters
d. Aromatic amino acid amides
e. Aromatic amino-aldehydes
1757. Mandatory payroll deductions are withheld from the salary of pharmacy workers. Specify the tax rate on income of natural persons:
*a. 18%
b. 0%
c. 15%
d. 20%
e. 5%
1758. Mandatory payroll deductions are withheld from the salary of pharmacy workers. Specify the tax rate on income of natural persons:
*a. 18%
b. 20%
c. 15%
d. 0%
e. 5%
1759. Mandatory payroll deductions are withheld from the salary of pharmacy workers. Specify the tax rate on income of natural persons:
a. 15%
b. 5%
*c. 18%
d. 20%
e. 0%
1760. Manufacturer's marketing department detected negative demand for a certain goods. What would be the marketing task? What type of marketing should be applied?
*a. Demand making, conversion marketing
b. Demand stimulation, promotional marketing
c. Demand increase, remarketing
d. Demand decrease, demarketing
e. Demand leveling, synchromarketing
1761. Manufacturer's marketing department detected negative demand for a certain goods. What would be the marketing task? What type of marketing should be applied?
a. Demand decrease, demarketing
b. Demand leveling, synchromarketing
c. Demand increase, remarketing
*d. Demand making, conversion marketing
e. Demand stimulation, promotional marketing
1762. Manufacturer's marketing department detected negative demand for a certain goods. What would be the marketing task? What type of marketing should be applied?
a. Demand stimulation, promotional marketing
b. Demand increase, remarketing
*c. Demand making, conversion marketing
d. Demand decrease, demarketing
e. Demand leveling, synchromarketing
1763. Marketing department of the Public Company ''Lugansk Chemical Pharmaceutical Factory'' determined that the demand for a herbal cough remedy, manufactured for children as a syrup, fluctualtes significantly within a year. Such demand is considered to be:
*a. Irregular
b. Inadequate
c. Unrealized
d. Incorrect
e. Irrational
1764. Marketing department of the Public Company ''Lugansk Chemical Pharmaceutical Factory'' determined that the demand for a herbal cough remedy, manufactured for children as a syrup, fluctualtes significantly within a year. Such demand is considered to be:
a. Inadequate
*b. Irregular
c. Unrealized
d. Irrational
e. Incorrect
1765. Marketing department of the Public Company ''Lugansk Chemical Pharmaceutical Factory'' determined that the demand for a herbal cough remedy, manufactured for children as a syrup, fluctualtes significantly within a year. Such demand is considered to be:
a. Unrealized
b. Incorrect
c. Irrational
*d. Irregular
e. Inadequate
1766. Medications Passit and Novopassit are used as tranquilizing, sedative and mild hypnotic agents. These medications are produced from the following grass:
*a. Purple passionflower
b. Lesser periwinkle
c. Garden sage
d. Elecampane
e. Three-lobe beggarticks
1767. Medications Passit and Novopassit are used as tranquilizing, sedative and mild hypnotic agents. These medications are produced from the following grass:
a. Garden sage
b. Three-lobe beggarticks
*c. Purple passionflower
d. Elecampane
e. Lesser periwinkle
1768. Medications Passit and Novopassit are used as tranquilizing, sedative and mild hypnotic agents. These medications are produced from the following grass:
a. Lesser periwinkle
b. Garden sage
*c. Purple passionflower
d. Elecampane
e. Three-lobe beggarticks
1769. Medicinal dyes should be stored in a special cabinet. Which of the listed medical products is a dye:
*a. Brilliant green
b. Ethyl alcohol
c. Ascorbic acid
d. Glucose
e. Hydrogen peroxide
1770. Medicinal dyes should be stored in a special cabinet. Which of the listed medical products is a dye:
a. Ethyl alcohol
*b. Brilliant green
c. Ascorbic acid
d. Glucose
e. Hydrogen peroxide
1771. Medicinal dyes should be stored in a special cabinet. Which of the listed medical products is a dye:
a. Glucose
*b. Brilliant green
c. Hydrogen peroxide
d. Ethyl alcohol
e. Ascorbic acid
1772. Medicinal substance had been received for chemical analysis. Biuret test was performed for identification. Name this substance:
*a. Bromisoval
b. Diphenhydramine
c. Benzoic acid
d. Iodoform
e. Dipyrone (Metamizole)
1773. Medicinal substance had been received for chemical analysis. Biuret test was performed for identification. Name this substance:
a. Benzoic acid
b. Dipyrone (Metamizole)
c. Iodoform
d. Diphenhydramine
*e. Bromisoval
1774. Medicinal substance had been received for chemical analysis. Biuret test was performed for identification. Name this substance:
a. Iodoform
b. Benzoic acid
c. Diphenhydramine
d. Dipyrone (Metamizole)
*e. Bromisoval
1775. Medicinal substances are introduced into multiphase ointments depending on their properties. How to introduce novocaine (procaine) hydrochloride into a vaseline-lanolin base?
*a. First dissolve it in the minimum amount of water
b. Grind it with a part of the molten base
c. Dissolve it in the molten base
d. Comminute it with glycerin
e. Comminute it with an alcohol or ether
1776. Medicinal substances are introduced into multiphase ointments depending on their properties. How to introduce novocaine (procaine) hydrochloride into a vaseline-lanolin base?
a. Comminute it with glycerin
b. Grind it with a part of the molten base
c. Comminute it with an alcohol or ether
*d. First dissolve it in the minimum amount of water
e. Dissolve it in the molten base
1777. Medicinal substances are introduced into multiphase ointments depending on their properties. How to introduce novocaine (procaine) hydrochloride into a vaseline-lanolin base?
a. Grind it with a part of the molten base
b. Dissolve it in the molten base
*c. First dissolve it in the minimum amount of water
d. Comminute it with glycerin
e. Comminute it with an alcohol or ether
1778. Menthol has an antispasmodic and analgesic effect. What herbal raw material is a source of menthol?
a. Folia Betulae
*b. Folia Menthae piperitae
c. Folia Salviae
d. Folia Absinthii
e. Folia Eucalypti
1779. Menthol has an antispasmodic and analgesic effect. What herbal raw material is a source of menthol?
a. Folia Eucalypti
*b. Folia Menthae piperitae
c. Folia Betulae
d. Folia Absinthii
e. Folia Salviae
1780. Menthol has an antispasmodic and analgesic effect. What herbal raw material is a source of menthol?
a. Folia Salviae
b. Folia Betulae
*c. Folia Menthae piperitae
d. Folia Eucalypti
e. Folia Absinthii
1781. Menthol has anesthetic and antiseptic effect. What plant is the source of menthol?
*a. Folia Menthae piperitae
b. Folia Eucalypti
c. Folia Uvae ursi
d. Folia Absinthii
e. Folia Salviae
1782. Menthol has anesthetic and antiseptic effect. What plant is the source of menthol?
a. Folia Eucalypti
b. Folia Absinthii
c. Folia Uvae ursi
d. Folia Salviae
*e. Folia Menthae piperitae
1783. Menthol has anesthetic and antiseptic effect. What plant is the source of menthol?
a. Folia Salviae
b. Folia Eucalypti
*c. Folia Menthae piperitae
d. Folia Uvae ursi
e. Folia Absinthii
1784. Menthol medicinal substance can be chemically classified as a:
a. Glycoside
b. Bicyclic terpene
*c. Monocyclic terpene
d. Polypeptide
e. Acyclic terpene
1785. Menthol medicinal substance can be chemically classified as a:
a. Glycoside
b. Bicyclic terpene
c. Acyclic terpene
*d. Monocyclic terpene
e. Polypeptide
1786. Menthol medicinal substance can be chemically classified as a:
a. Polypeptide
b. Acyclic terpene
c. Glycoside
*d. Monocyclic terpene
e. Bicyclic terpene
1787. Merchandising is a complex of communication techniques that aim to increase the sales in the pharmacies. The main goal of merchandising is:
a. Expanding the range of  pharmaceutical goods
*b. Quick sales of the whole range of goods on offer in the pharmacies and an overall increase of sales
c. Price-cutting for unpopular medicines
d. Decrease of the competition between the drug analogues
e. -
1788. Merchandising is a complex of communication techniques that aim to increase the sales in the pharmacies. The main goal of merchandising is:
a. Expanding the range of  pharmaceutical goods
b. -
c. Price-cutting for unpopular medicines
d. Decrease of the competition between the drug analogues
*e. Quick sales of the whole range of goods on offer in the pharmacies and an overall increase of sales
1789. Merchandising is a complex of communication techniques that aim to increase the sales in the pharmacies. The main goal of merchandising is:
a. Price-cutting for unpopular medicines
b. Decrease of the competition between the drug analogues
c. -
d. Expanding the range of  pharmaceutical goods
*e. Quick sales of the whole range of goods on offer in the pharmacies and an overall increase of sales
1790. Microcapsules are made by coating solid particles of the substance being encapsulated with a shell consisting of metallic silver, zinc, etc. Name this method of making microcapsules:
*a. Galvanization
b. Slurrying of the nuclei
c. Pelleting
d. Polymerization
e. Coacervation
1791. Microcapsules are made by coating solid particles of the substance being encapsulated with a shell consisting of metallic silver, zinc, etc. Name this method of making microcapsules:
a. Coacervation
b. Pelleting
c. Polymerization
*d. Galvanization
e. Slurrying of the nuclei
1792. Microcapsules are made by coating solid particles of the substance being encapsulated with a shell consisting of metallic silver, zinc, etc. Name this method of making microcapsules:
a. Polymerization
b. Coacervation
c. Slurrying of the nuclei
d. Pelleting
*e. Galvanization
1793. Microscopy of a root of a certain medicinal plant reveals the following features: parenchyma cells contain inulin, there are lacticifers, cambium line is clearly visible. This root belongs to:
a. Althaea officinalis
*b. Taraxacum officinalis
c. Zingiber officinale
d. Inula helenium
e. Sanguisorba officinalis
1794. Microscopy of a root of a certain medicinal plant reveals the following features: parenchyma cells contain inulin, there are lacticifers, cambium line is clearly visible. This root belongs to:
a. Inula helenium
b. Sanguisorba officinalis
c. Zingiber officinale
d. Althaea officinalis
*e. Taraxacum officinalis
1795. Microscopy of a root of a certain medicinal plant reveals the following features: parenchyma cells contain inulin, there are lacticifers, cambium line is clearly visible. This root belongs to:
a. Sanguisorba officinalis
b. Zingiber officinale
c. Althaea officinalis
d. Inula helenium
*e. Taraxacum officinalis
1796. Microscopy of herbal raw material reveals the following diagnostic characters in the microslide: pseudostratified cork, large parenchyma cells, filled with inulin, clearly visible cambium layer, large vessels, schizogenous cavities with essential oil. These features confirm the authenticity of the following herbal raw material:
a. Radices Althaeae
b. Radices Ononidis
c. Rhizomata et radices Rubiae
d. Radices Taraxaci
*e. Rhizomata et radices Inulaе
1797. Microscopy of herbal raw material reveals the following diagnostic characters in the microslide: pseudostratified cork, large parenchyma cells, filled with inulin, clearly visible cambium layer, large vessels, schizogenous cavities with essential oil. These features confirm the authenticity of the following herbal raw material:
a. Radices Ononidis
b. Radices Taraxaci
*c. Rhizomata et radices Inulaе
d. Rhizomata et radices Rubiae
e. Radices Althaeae
1798. Microscopy of herbal raw material reveals the following diagnostic characters in the microslide: pseudostratified cork, large parenchyma cells, filled with inulin, clearly visible cambium layer, large vessels, schizogenous cavities with essential oil. These features confirm the authenticity of the following herbal raw material:
a. Rhizomata et radices Rubiae
b. Radices Ononidis
c. Radices Althaeae
d. Radices Taraxaci
*e. Rhizomata et radices Inulaе
1799. Microscopy of transverse section of a bark sample shows a wide dark red cork layer, lamellar collenchyma, druses, bast fibers with a crystal sheath, and medullary rays. What herbal raw material is it?
a. Ash bark
b. Oak bark
*c. Buckthorn bark
d. Birch bark
e. Willow bark
1800. Microscopy of transverse section of a bark sample shows a wide dark red cork layer, lamellar collenchyma, druses, bast fibers with a crystal sheath, and medullary rays. What herbal raw material is it?
a. Birch bark
b. Willow bark
*c. Buckthorn bark
d. Oak bark
e. Ash bark
1801. Microscopy of transverse section of a bark sample shows a wide dark red cork layer, lamellar collenchyma, druses, bast fibers with a crystal sheath, and medullary rays. What herbal raw material is it?
a. Willow bark
b. Birch bark
*c. Buckthorn bark
d. Ash bark
e. Oak bark
1802. Mixture is a liquid dosage form for internal use. It is obtained by mixing two or more solid or liquid dosage forms in a solvent. If a mixture contains tinctures, they should be added:
a. After poisonous and narcotic substances are dissolved (before concentrates)
b. Last in the order of decreasing ethanol concentration
c. First
d. In the same order in which they are listed in the formulation
*e. Last in the order of increasing ethanol concentration
1803. Mixture is a liquid dosage form for internal use. It is obtained by mixing two or more solid or liquid dosage forms in a solvent. If a mixture contains tinctures, they should be added:
a. First
b. After poisonous and narcotic substances are dissolved (before concentrates)
c. Last in the order of decreasing ethanol concentration
*d. Last in the order of increasing ethanol concentration
e. In the same order in which they are listed in the formulation
1804. Mixture is a liquid dosage form for internal use. It is obtained by mixing two or more solid or liquid dosage forms in a solvent. If a mixture contains tinctures, they should be added:
a. In the same order in which they are listed in the formulation
*b. Last in the order of increasing ethanol concentration
c. After poisonous and narcotic substances are dissolved (before concentrates)
d. First
e. Last in the order of decreasing ethanol concentration
1805. Money received for the goods sold are being transferred to the pharmacy from its outlet. What document must be drawn up by a cashier for the receipt of this monetary sum?
*a. Cash receipt order
b. Cash withdrawal order
c. Cashier's check
d. Bank statement
e. Payment order
1806. Money received for the goods sold are being transferred to the pharmacy from its outlet. What document must be drawn up by a cashier for the receipt of this monetary sum?
a. Bank statement
*b. Cash receipt order
c. Payment order
d. Cash withdrawal order
e. Cashier's check
1807. Money received for the goods sold are being transferred to the pharmacy from its outlet. What document must be drawn up by a cashier for the receipt of this monetary sum?
a. Cashier's check
b. Cash withdrawal order
*c. Cash receipt order
d. Payment order
e. Bank statement
1808. Most drugs contain heterocyclic fragments in their structure. Which of the following drugs is a pyrrole derivative?
*a. Piracetam
b. Tolbutamide
c. Bendazol
d. Furosemide
e. Phencarol (Quifenadine)
1809. Most drugs contain heterocyclic fragments in their structure. Which of the following drugs is a pyrrole derivative?
a. Furosemide
*b. Piracetam
c. Bendazol
d. Tolbutamide
e. Phencarol (Quifenadine)
1810. Most drugs contain heterocyclic fragments in their structure. Which of the following drugs is a pyrrole derivative?
a. Phencarol (Quifenadine)
b. Bendazol
*c. Piracetam
d. Furosemide
e. Tolbutamide
1811. Most types of herbal raw materials are stored dry. However, for juice production the factories receive fresh herbal material. Name one such plant that is processed fresh:
a. Althаea officinalis
*b. Plantago major
c. Capsella bursa-pastoris
d. Rosa canina
e. Urtica dioica
1812. Most types of herbal raw materials are stored dry. However, for juice production the factories receive fresh herbal material. Name one such plant that is processed fresh:
a. Althаea officinalis
b. Urtica dioica
c. Rosa canina
d. Capsella bursa-pastoris
*e. Plantago major
1813. Most types of herbal raw materials are stored dry. However, for juice production the factories receive fresh herbal material. Name one such plant that is processed fresh:
a. Capsella bursa-pastoris
*b. Plantago major
c. Rosa canina
d. Althаea officinalis
e. Urtica dioica
1814. Motherwort grass is a component of hypotensive and sedative drugs. This herbal raw material should be harvested taking into account its renewal rate. Therefore it can be harvested:
*a. Once every 5 years
b. Once every 2 years
c. Once every 3 years
d. Every year
e. Once every 10 years
1815. Motherwort grass is a component of hypotensive and sedative drugs. This herbal raw material should be harvested taking into account its renewal rate. Therefore it can be harvested:
a. Every year
b. Once every 3 years
c. Once every 10 years
*d. Once every 5 years
e. Once every 2 years
1816. Motherwort grass is a component of hypotensive and sedative drugs. This herbal raw material should be harvested taking into account its renewal rate. Therefore it can be harvested:
a. Once every 10 years
*b. Once every 5 years
c. Once every 3 years
d. Once every 2 years
e. Every year
1817. Motivation is one of the management functions. A motive can be described as:
a. A certain discomfort, a feeling that  something is lacking
b. -
c. Something that is important for a  person
*d. A conscious incentive to act in a  certain way
e. Psychological characteristics of people that help them acquire certain types of knowledge
1818. Motivation is one of the management functions. A motive can be described as:
a. Something that is important for a  person
b. -
c. A certain discomfort, a feeling that  something is lacking
*d. A conscious incentive to act in a  certain way
e. Psychological characteristics of people that help them acquire certain types of knowledge
1819. Motivation is one of the management functions. A motive can be described as:
a. Something that is important for a  person
b. Psychological characteristics of people that help them acquire certain types of knowledge
*c. A conscious incentive to act in a  certain way
d. A certain discomfort, a feeling that  something is lacking
e. -
1820. Name the document where the actual hours worked by the pharmacy employees are recorded:
*a. Employee time sheet
b. Material aid log book
c. Medical certificate
d. Payroll
e. Work schedule
1821. Name the document where the actual hours worked by the pharmacy employees are recorded:
a. Payroll
*b. Employee time sheet
c. Work schedule
d. Material aid log book
e. Medical certificate
1822. Name the document where the actual hours worked by the pharmacy employees are recorded:
a. Payroll
b. Work schedule
c. Material aid log book
*d. Employee time sheet
e. Medical certificate
1823. Name the drug of choice for treatment of arterial hypertension during pregnancy:
*a. Alpha-methyldopa
b. Captopril
c. Sodium nitroprusside
d. Propranolol
e. Furosemide
1824. Name the drug of choice for treatment of arterial hypertension during pregnancy:
a. Furosemide
b. Captopril
*c. Alpha-methyldopa
d. Sodium nitroprusside
e. Propranolol
1825. Name the drug of choice for treatment of arterial hypertension during pregnancy:
a. Furosemide
b. Captopril
c. Sodium nitroprusside
d. Propranolol
*e. Alpha-methyldopa
1826. Name the list of effective and safe to use drugs and medical products for prevention, diagnosing, and treatment of the most common pathologies, based on their importance for healthcare in a specific country:
a. Over-the-counter drugs
*b. Essential drugs
c. Precursors
d. Substandard drugs
e. Drugs subject to strict accounting in a special inventory log
1827. Name the list of effective and safe to use drugs and medical products for prevention, diagnosing, and treatment of the most common pathologies, based on their importance for healthcare in a specific country:
a. Substandard drugs
b. Drugs subject to strict accounting in a special inventory log
*c. Essential drugs
d. Over-the-counter drugs
e. Precursors
1828. Name the list of pharmacy's property that indicates the actual balance and value of pharmacy's stocks as determined in the process of stock-taking:
a. Accounts ledger
b. Register of requisitions
c. Commodity report
d. Cash flow register
*e. Inventory
1829. Name the list of pharmacy's property that indicates the actual balance and value of pharmacy's stocks as determined in the process of stock-taking:
a. Cash flow register
b. Accounts ledger
c. Commodity report
*d. Inventory
e. Register of requisitions
1830. Name the list of pharmacy's property that indicates the actual balance and value of pharmacy's stocks as determined in the process of stock-taking:
a. Register of requisitions
b. Cash flow register
c. Accounts ledger
*d. Inventory
e. Commodity report
1831. Name the main indicator that differentiates water for injection from purified water:
a. Absence of heavy metals
*b. Apyrogenicity
c. pH value
d. The way in which it was obtained
e. Absence of mechanical inclusions
1832. Name the main indicator that differentiates water for injection from purified water:
a. Absence of mechanical inclusions
*b. Apyrogenicity
c. The way in which it was obtained
d. pH value
e. Absence of heavy metals
1833. Name the main indicator that differentiates water for injection from purified water:
a. Absence of mechanical inclusions
b. pH value
c. Absence of heavy metals
*d. Apyrogenicity
e. The way in which it was obtained
1834. Name the official document on audit results, which is drawn under the standard procedure and contains conclusions about reporting credibillity and integrity of financial statements of an organization:
*a. Auditor's conclusion
b. Statement of changes in equity
c. Cash flow statement
d. Balance sheet
e. Income statement
1835. Name the official document on audit results, which is drawn under the standard procedure and contains conclusions about reporting credibillity and integrity of financial statements of an organization:
a. Income statement
b. Balance sheet
*c. Auditor's conclusion
d. Cash flow statement
e. Statement of changes in equity
1836. Name the official document on audit results, which is drawn under the standard procedure and contains conclusions about reporting credibillity and integrity of financial statements of an organization:
a. Statement of changes in equity
b. Cash flow statement
*c. Auditor's conclusion
d. Income statement
e. Balance sheet
1837. Name the optimal vehicle for soluble vaginal suppositories:
a. Cocoa butter
b. Glycerine
*c. Polyethylene oxide
d. Hard fat
e. Fat
1838. Name the optimal vehicle for soluble vaginal suppositories:
a. Fat
b. Cocoa butter
c. Hard fat
d. Glycerine
*e. Polyethylene oxide
1839. Name the optimal vehicle for soluble vaginal suppositories:
a. Hard fat
b. Glycerine
c. Cocoa butter
*d. Polyethylene oxide
e. Fat
1840. Name the ready-to-use dosage form that is a gelatin capsule, filled with microcapsules that have an oil shell:
a. OROS tablet
b. Microcapsule
*c. Spansule
d. Pearl
e. Tubatine
1841. Name the ready-to-use dosage form that is a gelatin capsule, filled with microcapsules that have an oil shell:
a. OROS tablet
b. Tubatine
*c. Spansule
d. Microcapsule
e. Pearl
1842. Name the ready-to-use dosage form that is a gelatin capsule, filled with microcapsules that have an oil shell:
a. OROS tablet
b. Tubatine
*c. Spansule
d. Pearl
e. Microcapsule
1843. Name the type of suppositories that are made from aqueous suspensions and undergo deep freezing.
*a. Lyophilized
b. Dyed
c. Porous
d. Multi-layered
e. Hollow
1844. Name the type of suppositories that are made from aqueous suspensions and undergo deep freezing.
a. Multi-layered
b. Hollow
c. Dyed
*d. Lyophilized
e. Porous
1845. Name the type of suppositories that are made from aqueous suspensions and undergo deep freezing.
a. Multi-layered
b. Hollow
c. Dyed
d. Porous
*e. Lyophilized
1846. Natural penicillins are unstable at high temperatures and quickly break down in alkaline and acidic environments. What cycle causes such chemical properties of natural penicillins?
a. Phenothiazine
*b. beta-lactam
c. Quinoline
d. Furan
e. Pyridine
1847. Natural penicillins are unstable at high temperatures and quickly break down in alkaline and acidic environments. What cycle causes such chemical properties of natural penicillins?
a. Phenothiazine
b. Pyridine
c. Quinoline
d. Furan
*e. beta-lactam
1848. Natural penicillins are unstable at high temperatures and quickly break down in alkaline and acidic environments. What cycle causes such chemical properties of natural penicillins?
a. Quinoline
b. Furan
c. Phenothiazine
*d. beta-lactam
e. Pyridine
1849. Natural persons registered as small business entities with simplified taxation scheme are subject to limitation of the annual amount of sales proceeds. Specify the proceeds limit:
*a. 500 000 UAH
b. 100 000 UAH
c. 750 000 UAH
d. 5 000 000 UAH
e. 3 000 000 UAH
1850. Natural persons registered as small business entities with simplified taxation scheme are subject to limitation of the annual amount of sales proceeds. Specify the proceeds limit:
a. 5 000 000 UAH
*b. 500 000 UAH
c. 100 000 UAH
d. 750 000 UAH
e. 3 000 000 UAH
1851. Natural persons registered as small business entities with simplified taxation scheme are subject to limitation of the annual amount of sales proceeds. Specify the proceeds limit:
a. 5 000 000 UAH
b. 750 000 UAH
c. 3 000 000 UAH
*d. 500 000 UAH
e. 100 000 UAH
1852. Nicotinamide is a pyridine derivative, which can be identified by its positive reaction with:
a. Copper-tartrate solution
*b. Cyanogen bromide reagent
c. Thioglycolic acid solution
d. Thioacetamide reagent
e. Grade reagent
1853. Nicotinamide is a pyridine derivative, which can be identified by its positive reaction with:
a. Grade reagent
*b. Cyanogen bromide reagent
c. Copper-tartrate solution
d. Thioacetamide reagent
e. Thioglycolic acid solution
1854. Nicotinamide is a pyridine derivative, which can be identified by its positive reaction with:
a. Thioglycolic acid solution
b. Copper-tartrate solution
c. Grade reagent
d. Thioacetamide reagent
*e. Cyanogen bromide reagent
1855. Nitroxoline with sodium hydroxide solution produces:
*a. Orange-red coloration
b. Yellow precipitate
c. Green-black coloration
d. Violet coloration
e. White precipitate
1856. Nitroxoline with sodium hydroxide solution produces:
*a. Orange-red coloration
b. Yellow precipitate
c. White precipitate
d. Green-black coloration
e. Violet coloration
1857. Nitroxoline with sodium hydroxide solution produces:
a. Green-black coloration
b. White precipitate
c. Yellow precipitate
d. Violet coloration
*e. Orange-red coloration
1858. Number of mediators that pharmaceutical goods pass on their way from manufacturer to consumer is called:
a. -
b. Width of distribution channel
*c. Length of distribution channel
d. Level of distribution channel
e. Volume of distribution channel
1859. Number of mediators that pharmaceutical goods pass on their way from manufacturer to consumer is called:
a. Level of distribution channel
*b. Length of distribution channel
c. -
d. Width of distribution channel
e. Volume of distribution channel
1860. Number of mediators that pharmaceutical goods pass on their way from manufacturer to consumer is called:
a. Width of distribution channel
b. -
c. Volume of distribution channel
*d. Length of distribution channel
e. Level of distribution channel
1861. Oblong tablets are called:
a. Dragee
b. Forte tablets
c. Capsules
d. Pellets
*e. Caplets
1862. Oblong tablets are called:
a. Dragee
b. Pellets
*c. Caplets
d. Forte tablets
e. Capsules
1863. Oblong tablets are called:
a. Forte tablets
b. Capsules
c. Dragee
d. Pellets
*e. Caplets
1864. On the initiative and with support of the manufacturing company, free samples of adhesive bandages were handed out to the visitors at a pharmacy. What element of the marketing communications complex is it?
*a. Sales promotion, sampling
b. Lobbying
c. Public relations
d. Personal selling
e. Advertising
1865. On the initiative and with support of the manufacturing company, free samples of adhesive bandages were handed out to the visitors at a pharmacy. What element of the marketing communications complex is it?
a. Lobbying
b. Advertising
*c. Sales promotion, sampling
d. Personal selling
e. Public relations
1866. On the initiative and with support of the manufacturing company, free samples of adhesive bandages were handed out to the visitors at a pharmacy. What element of the marketing communications complex is it?
a. Personal selling
b. Public relations
*c. Sales promotion, sampling
d. Advertising
e. Lobbying
1867. On the occasion of the Pharmaceutical Worker Day in Ukraine, the best employees at a pharmacy were awarded the Letters of Commendation. What type of management methods was used in this case?
a. -
b. Administrative
c. Technological
*d. Socio-psychological
e. Economic
1868. On the occasion of the Pharmaceutical Worker Day in Ukraine, the best employees at a pharmacy were awarded the Letters of Commendation. What type of management methods was used in this case?
a. Economic
b. Administrative
*c. Socio-psychological
d. Technological
e. -
1869. On the occasion of the Pharmaceutical Worker Day in Ukraine, the best employees at a pharmacy were awarded the Letters of Commendation. What type of management methods was used in this case?
a. Technological
b. Administrative
*c. Socio-psychological
d. -
e. Economic
1870. One of the most important market characteristics is a goods economic trend. What economic trend can be characterized by relative stability of high prices and the highest activity of manufacturers and customers?
a. Downward
b. Sluggish
c. Low
d. Subsiding
*e. High (stable)
1871. One of the most important market characteristics is a goods economic trend. What economic trend can be characterized by relative stability of high prices and the highest activity of manufacturers and customers?
a. Low
*b. High (stable)
c. Subsiding
d. Downward
e. Sluggish
1872. One of the most important market characteristics is a goods economic trend. What economic trend can be characterized by relative stability of high prices and the highest activity of manufacturers and customers?
a. Subsiding
*b. High (stable)
c. Sluggish
d. Low
e. Downward
1873. One of the numerical parameters of herbal raw material quality is the amount of extractive substances that can be measured using:
*a. Gravimetry
b. Spectrophotometry
c. Chromatography
d. Biological standardization
e. Titrimetry
1874. One of the numerical parameters of herbal raw material quality is the amount of extractive substances that can be measured using:
a. Biological standardization
b. Chromatography
*c. Gravimetry
d. Spectrophotometry
e. Titrimetry
1875. One of the numerical parameters of herbal raw material quality is the amount of extractive substances that can be measured using:
a. Chromatography
b. Titrimetry
c. Biological standardization
*d. Gravimetry
e. Spectrophotometry
1876. One of the substances listed below changes its appearance when stored in a brightly lit place and not tightly sealed against air (assumes pink coloring). Name this substance:
a. Boric acid
b. Barium sulfate
c. Sodium benzoate
*d. Resorcin
e. Sodium chloride
1877. One of the substances listed below changes its appearance when stored in a brightly lit place and not tightly sealed against air (assumes pink coloring). Name this substance:
a. Sodium benzoate
b. Boric acid
c. Barium sulfate
*d. Resorcin
e. Sodium chloride
1878. One of the substances listed below changes its appearance when stored in a brightly lit place and not tightly sealed against air (assumes pink coloring). Name this substance:
a. Sodium chloride
*b. Resorcin
c. Boric acid
d. Sodium benzoate
e. Barium sulfate
1879. One of the substances listed below is textbfNOT a vitamin:
a. Calcium pangamate
*b. Calcium gluconate
c. Ergocalciferol
d. Nicotinic acid
e. Calcium pantothenate
1880. One of the substances listed below is textbfNOT a vitamin:
a. Calcium pantothenate
b. Nicotinic acid
c. Ergocalciferol
d. Calcium pangamate
*e. Calcium gluconate
1881. One of the substances listed below is textbfNOT a vitamin:
a. Nicotinic acid
b. Calcium pantothenate
c. Calcium pangamate
d. Ergocalciferol
*e. Calcium gluconate
1882. Optical rotation angle of substances is determined under the temperature of 20^oC, in 1-decimeter-thick layer, with wavelength of sodium spectrum D-lines (lambda = 589,3 nm), and is calculated with reference to a solution containing 1 g of the substance per ml. It is called:
*a. Specific optical rotation
b. Relative density
c. Optical density
d. Distribution coefficient
e. Refractive index
1883. Optical rotation angle of substances is determined under the temperature of 20^oC, in 1-decimeter-thick layer, with wavelength of sodium spectrum D-lines (lambda = 589,3 nm), and is calculated with reference to a solution containing 1 g of the substance per ml. It is called:
a. Distribution coefficient
b. Relative density
*c. Specific optical rotation
d. Refractive index
e. Optical density
1884. Optical rotation angle of substances is determined under the temperature of 20^oC, in 1-decimeter-thick layer, with wavelength of sodium spectrum D-lines (lambda = 589,3 nm), and is calculated with reference to a solution containing 1 g of the substance per ml. It is called:
a. Refractive index
b. Optical density
c. Distribution coefficient
*d. Specific optical rotation
e. Relative density
1885. Organizationally, a pharmacy is divided into separate departments: Prescription and Extemporaneous Medicines, Stock Department, and Over-the-Counter Medicines. What organizational management structure can be characterized by such a division?
*a. Functional
b. Divisional
c. Linear
d. Matrix
e. Line and staff
1886. Organizationally, a pharmacy is divided into separate departments: Prescription and Extemporaneous Medicines, Stock Department, and Over-the-Counter Medicines. What organizational management structure can be characterized by such a division?
a. Divisional
b. Linear
c. Matrix
*d. Functional
e. Line and staff
1887. Organizationally, a pharmacy is divided into separate departments: Prescription and Extemporaneous Medicines, Stock Department, and Over-the-Counter Medicines. What organizational management structure can be characterized by such a division?
a. Line and staff
*b. Functional
c. Divisional
d. Linear
e. Matrix
1888. Origanum vulgare herbal raw material is harvested during the flowering. How is it harvested?
a. Only the tips of the inflorescences are cut
*b. The grass is cut with a knife or sickle at a distance of 20-30 cm from the ground
c. The leaves are plucked with the stem
d. The whole plant is dug up
e. The whole plant with a root is pulled out from the soil
1889. Origanum vulgare herbal raw material is harvested during the flowering. How is it harvested?
a. The leaves are plucked with the stem
b. The whole plant is dug up
c. The whole plant with a root is pulled out from the soil
d. Only the tips of the inflorescences are cut
*e. The grass is cut with a knife or sickle at a distance of 20-30 cm from the ground
1890. Origanum vulgare herbal raw material is harvested during the flowering. How is it harvested?
a. The whole plant with a root is pulled out from the soil
b. The whole plant is dug up
*c. The grass is cut with a knife or sickle at a distance of 20-30 cm from the ground
d. The leaves are plucked with the stem
e. Only the tips of the inflorescences are cut
1891. Paracetamol reaction with hydrochloric acid, followed by addition of potassium dichromate, produces the following:
a. Azo dye
b. Aurin dye
*c. Indophenol dye
d. Schiff base
e. Triphenylmethane dye
1892. Paracetamol reaction with hydrochloric acid, followed by addition of potassium dichromate, produces the following:
a. Azo dye
b. Triphenylmethane dye
c. Aurin dye
*d. Indophenol dye
e. Schiff base
1893. Paracetamol reaction with hydrochloric acid, followed by addition of potassium dichromate, produces the following:
a. Triphenylmethane dye
b. Schiff base
c. Azo dye
d. Aurin dye
*e. Indophenol dye
1894. Paracetamol substance has been sent for analysis. Reaction with the solution of iron (III) chloride resilted in the blue-violet coloring. This indicates the presence of:
*a. Phenolic hydroxyl
b. Aldehyde group
c. Ester group
d. Alcoholic hydroxyl
e. Keto group
1895. Paracetamol substance has been sent for analysis. Reaction with the solution of iron (III) chloride resilted in the blue-violet coloring. This indicates the presence of:
a. Aldehyde group
b. Alcoholic hydroxyl
*c. Phenolic hydroxyl
d. Keto group
e. Ester group
1896. Paracetamol substance has been sent for analysis. Reaction with the solution of iron (III) chloride resilted in the blue-violet coloring. This indicates the presence of:
a. Aldehyde group
b. Alcoholic hydroxyl
c. Ester group
*d. Phenolic hydroxyl
e. Keto group
1897. Passiflora incarnata grass contains a complex of indole alkaloids. What pharmacological group do Passiflora preparations belong to?
a. Antibacterial agents
*b. Sedatives
c. Diuretics
d. Wound healing agents
e. Laxatives
1898. Passiflora incarnata grass contains a complex of indole alkaloids. What pharmacological group do Passiflora preparations belong to?
a. Antibacterial agents
*b. Sedatives
c. Laxatives
d. Diuretics
e. Wound healing agents
1899. Passiflora incarnata grass contains a complex of indole alkaloids. What pharmacological group do Passiflora preparations belong to?
a. Diuretics
b. Laxatives
*c. Sedatives
d. Wound healing agents
e. Antibacterial agents
1900. Pectin is a heteropolysaccharide. What is its pharmacological effect?
a. Cardiotonic
*b. Detoxicant
c. Expectorant
d. Litholytic
e. Astringent
1901. Pectin is a heteropolysaccharide. What is its pharmacological effect?
a. Expectorant
b. Litholytic
c. Astringent
d. Cardiotonic
*e. Detoxicant
1902. Pectin is a heteropolysaccharide. What is its pharmacological effect?
a. Litholytic
*b. Detoxicant
c. Cardiotonic
d. Expectorant
e. Astringent
1903. Pharmaceutical analysis of glutamic acid requires the determination of nitrogen after mineralization with concentrated sulfuric acid. Ammonia that forms during the test is pumped away into the receiving flask. What solution should the receiving flask contain during this test?
a. Freshly prepared tannin solution
b. Saturated sodium chloride solution
c. Titrated sodium edetate solution
*d. Titrated hydrochloric acid solution
e. Iodized potassium iodide solution
1904. Pharmaceutical analysis of glutamic acid requires the determination of nitrogen after mineralization with concentrated sulfuric acid. Ammonia that forms during the test is pumped away into the receiving flask. What solution should the receiving flask contain during this test?
a. Freshly prepared tannin solution
b. Titrated sodium edetate solution
c. Saturated sodium chloride solution
*d. Titrated hydrochloric acid solution
e. Iodized potassium iodide solution
1905. Pharmaceutical analysis of glutamic acid requires the determination of nitrogen after mineralization with concentrated sulfuric acid. Ammonia that forms during the test is pumped away into the receiving flask. What solution should the receiving flask contain during this test?
a. Titrated sodium edetate solution
b. Iodized potassium iodide solution
*c. Titrated hydrochloric acid solution
d. Saturated sodium chloride solution
e. Freshly prepared tannin solution
1906. Pharmaceutical corporations pay great attention to the formation of a certain set of values, traditions, and behavioral norms for all their employees. What is formed as a result of this type of corporate organizational work?
a. Business expansion
b. Organization profitability
*c. Organization culture
d. Product diversification
e. Staff leasing
1907. Pharmaceutical corporations pay great attention to the formation of a certain set of values, traditions, and behavioral norms for all their employees. What is formed as a result of this type of corporate organizational work?
a. Staff leasing
b. Business expansion
c. Organization profitability
*d. Organization culture
e. Product diversification
1908. Pharmaceutical corporations pay great attention to the formation of a certain set of values, traditions, and behavioral norms for all their employees. What is formed as a result of this type of corporate organizational work?
a. Staff leasing
b. Organization profitability
c. Product diversification
*d. Organization culture
e. Business expansion
1909. Pharmaceutical factory received a batch of Althaea roots. What reagent should be used in histochemical test for slime production in the course of qualitative analysis?
a. 1% ammonium iron(III) sulfate solution
b. Sudan III solution
*c. Alcoholic solution of methylene blue
d. 1% phloroglucinol solution
e. Dragendorff reagent
1910. Pharmaceutical factory received a batch of Althaea roots. What reagent should be used in histochemical test for slime production in the course of qualitative analysis?
a. 1% ammonium iron(III) sulfate solution
b. Sudan III solution
*c. Alcoholic solution of methylene blue
d. Dragendorff reagent
e. 1% phloroglucinol solution
1911. Pharmaceutical factory received a batch of Althaea roots. What reagent should be used in histochemical test for slime production in the course of qualitative analysis?
a. 1% phloroglucinol solution
b. 1% ammonium iron(III) sulfate solution
c. Sudan III solution
d. Dragendorff reagent
*e. Alcoholic solution of methylene blue
1912. Pharmaceutical logistics is aimed at advertising, search for customers, entering into agreements, after-sales service, and transportation. What type of logistics is it?
a. Manufacturing
*b. Sales
c. Information
d. Procurement
e. Human resources
1913. Pharmaceutical logistics is aimed at advertising, search for customers, entering into agreements, after-sales service, and transportation. What type of logistics is it?
a. Procurement
*b. Sales
c. Human resources
d. Manufacturing
e. Information
1914. Pharmaceutical logistics is aimed at advertising, search for customers, entering into agreements, after-sales service, and transportation. What type of logistics is it?
a. Procurement
b. Human resources
c. Information
*d. Sales
e. Manufacturing
1915. Pharmaceutical workers decided to organize a business. What is the basis of the concept of "limited liability company"?
*a. A company, the members of which bear the liability for the company's debts within the amount of their contributions
b. A company, the members of which bear additional solidary liability for the company's obligations with all their property
c. A company, the members of which bear the liability for the company's debts within the amount of their contributions, and if these amounts are insufficient, all the members are equally liable to cover the debt with their personal property
d. A company, the members of which bear full liability
e. A company, the members of which bear additional solidary liability for the company's obligations with all their property, while the company's investors bear liability only in the amount of their investments
1916. Pharmaceutical workers decided to organize a business. What is the basis of the concept of "limited liability company"?
a. A company, the members of which bear full liability
b. A company, the members of which bear additional solidary liability for the company's obligations with all their property
c. A company, the members of which bear additional solidary liability for the company's obligations with all their property, while the company's investors bear liability only in the amount of their investments
*d. A company, the members of which bear the liability for the company's debts within the amount of their contributions
e. A company, the members of which bear the liability for the company's debts within the amount of their contributions, and if these amounts are insufficient, all the members are equally liable to cover the debt with their personal property
1917. Pharmaceutical workers decided to organize a business. What is the basis of the concept of "limited liability company"?
a. A company, the members of which bear full liability
b. A company, the members of which bear additional solidary liability for the company's obligations with all their property, while the company's investors bear liability only in the amount of their investments
c. A company, the members of which bear additional solidary liability for the company's obligations with all their property
*d. A company, the members of which bear the liability for the company's debts within the amount of their contributions
e. A company, the members of which bear the liability for the company's debts within the amount of their contributions, and if these amounts are insufficient, all the members are equally liable to cover the debt with their personal property
1918. Pharmacies can prepare medicines based on individual formulations. What makes up the retail price of such medicines?
a. Cost of labor and price markup
b. Cost of ingredients and package
*c. Cost of ingredients, package, and labor
d. Cost of ingredients
e. Cost of the ingredients that make up this dosage form
1919. Pharmacies can prepare medicines based on individual formulations. What makes up the retail price of such medicines?
a. Cost of the ingredients that make up this dosage form
b. Cost of ingredients and package
c. Cost of labor and price markup
*d. Cost of ingredients, package, and labor
e. Cost of ingredients
1920. Pharmacies can prepare medicines based on individual formulations. What makes up the retail price of such medicines?
a. Cost of the ingredients that make up this dosage form
b. Cost of labor and price markup
*c. Cost of ingredients, package, and labor
d. Cost of ingredients and package
e. Cost of ingredients
1921. Pharmacies use cash registers during the sales of medicines. Name the document for the accounting of Z-reports:
*a. Transactions ledger
b. Prescription logbook
c. Receipt book
d. Cash book
e. Customers ledger
1922. Pharmacies use cash registers during the sales of medicines. Name the document for the accounting of Z-reports:
*a. Transactions ledger
b. Receipt book
c. Cash book
d. Customers ledger
e. Prescription logbook
1923. Pharmacies use cash registers during the sales of medicines. Name the document for the accounting of Z-reports:
a. Customers ledger
*b. Transactions ledger
c. Prescription logbook
d. Receipt book
e. Cash book
1924. Pharmacological properties and bioavailability of drugs is determined by their chemical structure. What medicinal substance contains simultaneously a carboxyl group and an ester group?
a. Benzoic acid
b. Phenyl salicylate
c. Sodium benzoate
d. Salicylic acid
*e. Acetylsalicylic acid
1925. Pharmacological properties and bioavailability of drugs is determined by their chemical structure. What medicinal substance contains simultaneously a carboxyl group and an ester group?
a. Phenyl salicylate
b. Benzoic acid
*c. Acetylsalicylic acid
d. Sodium benzoate
e. Salicylic acid
1926. Pharmacological properties and bioavailability of drugs is determined by their chemical structure. What medicinal substance contains simultaneously a carboxyl group and an ester group?
a. Salicylic acid
b. Sodium benzoate
c. Phenyl salicylate
*d. Acetylsalicylic acid
e. Benzoic acid
1927. Pharmacy as a healthcare facility fulfills three main functions. Its manufacturing function includes:
*a. Preparation of individual formulations
b. Pharmaceutical care
c. Providing access to pharmaceutical information
d. Health education of the population
e. Storage of medical products
1928. Pharmacy as a healthcare facility fulfills three main functions. Its manufacturing function includes:
*a. Preparation of individual formulations
b. Storage of medical products
c. Health education of the population
d. Pharmaceutical care
e. Providing access to pharmaceutical information
1929. Pharmacy as a healthcare facility fulfills three main functions. Its manufacturing function includes:
a. Pharmaceutical care
b. Storage of medical products
c. Providing access to pharmaceutical information
*d. Preparation of individual formulations
e. Health education of the population
1930. Pharmacy assets can be divided into current and non-current. What should be classified as non-current assets when drawing up the balance sheet?
a. Herbal raw materials
b. Packaging
*c. Buildings
d. Monetary funds
e. Goods
1931. Pharmacy assets can be divided into current and non-current. What should be classified as non-current assets when drawing up the balance sheet?
a. Monetary funds
b. Goods
c. Herbal raw materials
*d. Buildings
e. Packaging
1932. Pharmacy assets can be divided into current and non-current. What should be classified as non-current assets when drawing up the balance sheet?
a. Packaging
b. Goods
c. Monetary funds
*d. Buildings
e. Herbal raw materials
1933. Pharmacy employees receive their salary payments twice a month. What should the cashier do, if a pay day coincides with a holiday?
a. There are no regulations regarding payment of salaries in this case
b. To pay the salaries on the holiday
c. To pay the salaries 10 days earlier
*d. To pay the salaries one day earlier
e. To pay the salaries after the holiday
1934. Pharmacy employees receive their salary payments twice a month. What should the cashier do, if a pay day coincides with a holiday?
a. To pay the salaries 10 days earlier
*b. To pay the salaries one day earlier
c. There are no regulations regarding payment of salaries in this case
d. To pay the salaries on the holiday
e. To pay the salaries after the holiday
1935. Pharmacy employees receive their salary payments twice a month. What should the cashier do, if a pay day coincides with a holiday?
a. To pay the salaries after the holiday
b. To pay the salaries on the holiday
c. There are no regulations regarding payment of salaries in this case
d. To pay the salaries 10 days earlier
*e. To pay the salaries one day earlier
1936. Pharmacy premises can be divided into service rooms and workrooms. Name the workroom for storage of medical products:
*a. Material storage room
b. Distillation room
c. Shop floor
d. Washing room
e. Aseptic block
1937. Pharmacy premises can be divided into service rooms and workrooms. Name the workroom for storage of medical products:
*a. Material storage room
b. Washing room
c. Distillation room
d. Aseptic block
e. Shop floor
1938. Pharmacy premises can be divided into service rooms and workrooms. Name the workroom for storage of medical products:
a. Aseptic block
b. Distillation room
*c. Material storage room
d. Shop floor
e. Washing room
1939. Pharmacy workers can receive an extra pay, if they combine several professions or positions, take upon themselves the duties of a temporarily absent employee, or have to manage an increased workload. In this case, the maximum possible bonus constitutes the following percentage of the employee's salary:
a. 10%
*b. 50%
c. 20%
d. 30%
e. 40%
1940. Pharmacy workers can receive an extra pay, if they combine several professions or positions, take upon themselves the duties of a temporarily absent employee, or have to manage an increased workload. In this case, the maximum possible bonus constitutes the following percentage of the employee's salary:
a. 30%
b. 40%
c. 20%
*d. 50%
e. 10%
1941. Pharmacy workers can receive an extra pay, if they combine several professions or positions, take upon themselves the duties of a temporarily absent employee, or have to manage an increased workload. In this case, the maximum possible bonus constitutes the following percentage of the employee's salary:
a. 40%
b. 20%
c. 30%
d. 10%
*e. 50%
1942. Phenylii salicylas can be identified by the smell of phenol that is produced when the following is added into the preparation:
*a. H_2SO_4
b. CuSO_4
c. СоCl_2
d. NaCl
e. AgNO_3
1943. Phenylii salicylas can be identified by the smell of phenol that is produced when the following is added into the preparation:
a. AgNO_3
b. NaCl
c. CuSO_4
*d. H_2SO_4
e. СоCl_2
1944. Phenylii salicylas can be identified by the smell of phenol that is produced when the following is added into the preparation:
a. СоCl_2
*b. H_2SO_4
c. CuSO_4
d. NaCl
e. AgNO_3
1945. Phospholipids are used in medicine in production of hepatoprotectors. What oil is a source of phospholipids?
*a. Oleum Sojae
b. Oleum Lini
c. Oleum Cucurbitae
d. Oleum Amygdalarum
e. Oleum Ricini
1946. Phospholipids are used in medicine in production of hepatoprotectors. What oil is a source of phospholipids?
a. Oleum Amygdalarum
b. Oleum Lini
c. Oleum Cucurbitae
*d. Oleum Sojae
e. Oleum Ricini
1947. Phospholipids are used in medicine in production of hepatoprotectors. What oil is a source of phospholipids?
a. Oleum Cucurbitae
b. Oleum Ricini
*c. Oleum Sojae
d. Oleum Lini
e. Oleum Amygdalarum
1948. Phytochemical workshop of a factory manufactures pancreatin. What is the source material for obtaining pancreatin?
*a. Pancreas of pigs or cattle
b. Gastric mucosa of pigs
c. Heart of cattle
d. Lungs of cattle
e. Egg white
1949. Phytochemical workshop of a factory manufactures pancreatin. What is the source material for obtaining pancreatin?
*a. Pancreas of pigs or cattle
b. Lungs of cattle
c. Egg white
d. Heart of cattle
e. Gastric mucosa of pigs
1950. Phytochemical workshop of a factory manufactures pancreatin. What is the source material for obtaining pancreatin?
*a. Pancreas of pigs or cattle
b. Lungs of cattle
c. Heart of cattle
d. Gastric mucosa of pigs
e. Egg white
1951. Polemonium caeruleum rhizomes with roots are a source material for making expectorants. What group of substances causes this effect?
*a. Saponins
b. Vitamins
c. Anthraquinones
d. Tannins
e. Flavonoids
1952. Polemonium caeruleum rhizomes with roots are a source material for making expectorants. What group of substances causes this effect?
a. Flavonoids
*b. Saponins
c. Tannins
d. Anthraquinones
e. Vitamins
1953. Polemonium caeruleum rhizomes with roots are a source material for making expectorants. What group of substances causes this effect?
a. Vitamins
b. Flavonoids
*c. Saponins
d. Anthraquinones
e. Tannins
1954. Polyethylene oxide base belongs to the following group:
a. Emulsion
*b. Hydrophilic
c. Fat
d. Amphiphilic
e. Hydrophobic
1955. Polyethylene oxide base belongs to the following group:
a. Emulsion
b. Fat
*c. Hydrophilic
d. Amphiphilic
e. Hydrophobic
1956. Polyethylene oxide base belongs to the following group:
a. Hydrophobic
b. Emulsion
c. Amphiphilic
d. Fat
*e. Hydrophilic
1957. Powder moisture content affects its:
*a. Flowability
b. Particle shape
c. Solubility
d. Particle size
e. Homogeneity
1958. Powder moisture content affects its:
a. Particle size
b. Solubility
*c. Flowability
d. Homogeneity
e. Particle shape
1959. Powder moisture content affects its:
a. Solubility
b. Particle size
*c. Flowability
d. Particle shape
e. Homogeneity
1960. Powders are a solid dosage form for internal or external use. What stage is textbfNOT a part of powder production?
*a. Granulation
b. Comminution
c. Packing
d. Sifting
e. Mixing
1961. Powders are a solid dosage form for internal or external use. What stage is textbfNOT a part of powder production?
a. Comminution
b. Mixing
c. Packing
*d. Granulation
e. Sifting
1962. Powders are a solid dosage form for internal or external use. What stage is textbfNOT a part of powder production?
a. Packing
*b. Granulation
c. Sifting
d. Mixing
e. Comminution
1963. Powders made with a certain medicinal substance need to be prepared at a separate workplace, using separate scales and mortar. Name this substance:
a. Magnesium oxide
b. Ascorbic acid
*c. Xeroform (bismuth tribromphenolate and bismuth oxide complex)
d. Zinc oxide
e. Glucose
1964. Powders made with a certain medicinal substance need to be prepared at a separate workplace, using separate scales and mortar. Name this substance:
a. Magnesium oxide
b. Zinc oxide
*c. Xeroform (bismuth tribromphenolate and bismuth oxide complex)
d. Glucose
e. Ascorbic acid
1965. Powders made with a certain medicinal substance need to be prepared at a separate workplace, using separate scales and mortar. Name this substance:
a. Zinc oxide
*b. Xeroform (bismuth tribromphenolate and bismuth oxide complex)
c. Ascorbic acid
d. Magnesium oxide
e. Glucose
1966. Practically no microorganisms can develop in the sugar syrup, if its concentration is optimal. Why is it so?
*a. Because osmotic pressure in the solution is higher than in the microbial cell
b. Because of high pH
c. Because of low pH
d. Only because preservatives were added into the syrup
e. Because of decreased surface tension between the solution and the microbial cell
1967. Practically no microorganisms can develop in the sugar syrup, if its concentration is optimal. Why is it so?
a. Because of high pH
b. Because of low pH
c. Because of decreased surface tension between the solution and the microbial cell
d. Only because preservatives were added into the syrup
*e. Because osmotic pressure in the solution is higher than in the microbial cell
1968. Practically no microorganisms can develop in the sugar syrup, if its concentration is optimal. Why is it so?
a. Only because preservatives were added into the syrup
b. Because of high pH
c. Because of decreased surface tension between the solution and the microbial cell
*d. Because osmotic pressure in the solution is higher than in the microbial cell
e. Because of low pH
1969. Preparations of Panax roots have tonic and adaptogenic properties and improve mental and physical working ability. If there is no Panax tincture in the pharmacy, it can be substituted with preparations of:
a. Glyсyrrhizae radiсes
*b. Araliae mandshuriсae radiсes
c. Tormentillae radiсes
d. Taraxaсi radiсes
e. Сalami radiсes
1970. Preparations of Panax roots have tonic and adaptogenic properties and improve mental and physical working ability. If there is no Panax tincture in the pharmacy, it can be substituted with preparations of:
a. Tormentillae radiсes
*b. Araliae mandshuriсae radiсes
c. Сalami radiсes
d. Glyсyrrhizae radiсes
e. Taraxaсi radiсes
1971. Preparations of Panax roots have tonic and adaptogenic properties and improve mental and physical working ability. If there is no Panax tincture in the pharmacy, it can be substituted with preparations of:
a. Сalami radiсes
*b. Araliae mandshuriсae radiсes
c. Taraxaсi radiсes
d. Glyсyrrhizae radiсes
e. Tormentillae radiсes
1972. Preparations of sorrel roots can have both a laxative and astringent effect. This is due to the presence of the following biologically active substances:
*a. Anthracene derivatives and tannins
b. Coumarins and phenol glycosides
c. Essential and fatty oils
d. Flavonoids and essential oils
e. Iridoids and vitamins
1973. Preparations of sorrel roots can have both a laxative and astringent effect. This is due to the presence of the following biologically active substances:
a. Coumarins and phenol glycosides
b. Essential and fatty oils
c. Iridoids and vitamins
*d. Anthracene derivatives and tannins
e. Flavonoids and essential oils
1974. Preparations of sorrel roots can have both a laxative and astringent effect. This is due to the presence of the following biologically active substances:
a. Essential and fatty oils
b. Coumarins and phenol glycosides
c. Iridoids and vitamins
d. Flavonoids and essential oils
*e. Anthracene derivatives and tannins
1975. Prescriptions for psychotropic drugs remain in the pharmacy after the sale. How long must they be kept?
a. One month
*b. Five years
c. Three years
d. The prescription must be returned to the patient
e. One year
1976. Prescriptions for psychotropic drugs remain in the pharmacy after the sale. How long must they be kept?
a. One month
b. The prescription must be returned to the patient
c. One year
d. Three years
*e. Five years
1977. Prescriptions for psychotropic drugs remain in the pharmacy after the sale. How long must they be kept?
a. The prescription must be returned to the patient
b. One year
c. Three years
d. One month
*e. Five years
1978. Presence of nitrate radical in metronidazole structure can be confirmed by reduction of nitrate radical to amino group with production of:
*a. Azo dye
b. Iodoform
c. Indophenol
d. Murexide
e. Thiochrome
1979. Presence of nitrate radical in metronidazole structure can be confirmed by reduction of nitrate radical to amino group with production of:
a. Indophenol
*b. Azo dye
c. Murexide
d. Thiochrome
e. Iodoform
1980. Presence of phenolic hydroxyl in the structure of pyridoxine hydrochloride can be confirmed by application of the following solution:
a. Silver nitrate
b. Sodium nitrite
c. Potassium permanganate
*d. Iron (III) cloride
e. Sodium sulfate
1981. Presence of phenolic hydroxyl in the structure of pyridoxine hydrochloride can be confirmed by application of the following solution:
a. Sodium sulfate
*b. Iron (III) cloride
c. Potassium permanganate
d. Silver nitrate
e. Sodium nitrite
1982. Presence of phenolic hydroxyl in the structure of pyridoxine hydrochloride can be confirmed by application of the following solution:
a. Sodium sulfate
b. Sodium nitrite
*c. Iron (III) cloride
d. Potassium permanganate
e. Silver nitrate
1983. Prior to making a sodium chloride isotonic solution a pharmacist baked the powder in a dry heat box. What substances are removed by this operation?
*a. Pyrogenic substances
b. Redox substances
c. Chlorides
d. Moisture
e. Sulfates
1984. Prior to making a sodium chloride isotonic solution a pharmacist baked the powder in a dry heat box. What substances are removed by this operation?
a. Moisture
b. Sulfates
c. Chlorides
*d. Pyrogenic substances
e. Redox substances
1985. Prior to making a sodium chloride isotonic solution a pharmacist baked the powder in a dry heat box. What substances are removed by this operation?
a. Sulfates
*b. Pyrogenic substances
c. Moisture
d. Redox substances
e. Chlorides
1986. Product sales manager of a pharmaceutical company was tasked with sales program inspection and given 10 days to complete this task. The manager completed this task within 5 days and expects to be rewarded with a bonus. What theory of achievement motivation is based on expectation of a certain event?
*a. Vroom's expectancy theory
b. McClelland's theory of needs
c. McGregor's Theory X and Theory Y
d. Herzberg's two-factor theory
e. Maslow's hierarchy of needs
1987. Product sales manager of a pharmaceutical company was tasked with sales program inspection and given 10 days to complete this task. The manager completed this task within 5 days and expects to be rewarded with a bonus. What theory of achievement motivation is based on expectation of a certain event?
a. McGregor's Theory X and Theory Y
*b. Vroom's expectancy theory
c. Maslow's hierarchy of needs
d. McClelland's theory of needs
e. Herzberg's two-factor theory
1988. Product sales manager of a pharmaceutical company was tasked with sales program inspection and given 10 days to complete this task. The manager completed this task within 5 days and expects to be rewarded with a bonus. What theory of achievement motivation is based on expectation of a certain event?
a. McGregor's Theory X and Theory Y
b. Maslow's hierarchy of needs
*c. Vroom's expectancy theory
d. Herzberg's two-factor theory
e. McClelland's theory of needs
1989. Production of tablets requires stage-to-stage quality control. What devices are used to determine the particle size distribution (fraction) of granules?
*a. Standard set of sieves
b. Friabilators
c. Various vibrosieves
d. Microscope
e. Laboratory identifiers
1990. Production of tablets requires stage-to-stage quality control. What devices are used to determine the particle size distribution (fraction) of granules?
a. Microscope
*b. Standard set of sieves
c. Friabilators
d. Various vibrosieves
e. Laboratory identifiers
1991. Production of tablets requires stage-to-stage quality control. What devices are used to determine the particle size distribution (fraction) of granules?
a. Various vibrosieves
b. Microscope
*c. Standard set of sieves
d. Friabilators
e. Laboratory identifiers
1992. Profitability is an economic parameter that characterizes the effectiveness of the pharmacy's commercial, financial, and manufacturing activity. What parameters are used to determine the profitability of sales?
*a. Profit  turnover of goods
b. Turnover of goods  cost price of products
c. Cost price of products  liquidity
d. Liquidity  solvency
e. Turnover of goods  wages
1993. Profitability is an economic parameter that characterizes the effectiveness of the pharmacy's commercial, financial, and manufacturing activity. What parameters are used to determine the profitability of sales?
*a. Profit  turnover of goods
b. Turnover of goods  cost price of products
c. Liquidity  solvency
d. Cost price of products  liquidity
e. Turnover of goods  wages
1994. Profitability is an economic parameter that characterizes the effectiveness of the pharmacy's commercial, financial, and manufacturing activity. What parameters are used to determine the profitability of sales?
a. Turnover of goods  wages
b. Cost price of products  liquidity
*c. Profit  turnover of goods
d. Turnover of goods  cost price of products
e. Liquidity  solvency
1995. Profitability is one of the economic indicators of the pharmacy's trading activity. It is calculated as a:
a. Ratio of the sum of profits to the sum of cost price of the goods x100%
*b. Ratio of the sum of profits to the sum of turnover x100%
c. -
d. Ratio of the sum of profits to the sum of expences x100%
e. Ratio of the sum of profits to the total cost of fixed assets x100%
1996. Profitability is one of the economic indicators of the pharmacy's trading activity. It is calculated as a:
a. Ratio of the sum of profits to the sum of expences x100%
*b. Ratio of the sum of profits to the sum of turnover x100%
c. -
d. Ratio of the sum of profits to the total cost of fixed assets x100%
e. Ratio of the sum of profits to the sum of cost price of the goods x100%
1997. Profitability is one of the economic indicators of the pharmacy's trading activity. It is calculated as a:
a. Ratio of the sum of profits to the total cost of fixed assets x100%
*b. Ratio of the sum of profits to the sum of turnover x100%
c. -
d. Ratio of the sum of profits to the sum of cost price of the goods x100%
e. Ratio of the sum of profits to the sum of expences x100%
1998. Propellants are used in aerosols production. Specify the function of propellants:
a. Action prolongation
*b. Create pressure in the package
c. Dispersion
d. Emulsification
e. Stabilization
1999. Propellants are used in aerosols production. Specify the function of propellants:
a. Dispersion
b. Action prolongation
c. Emulsification
d. Stabilization
*e. Create pressure in the package
2000. Propellants are used in aerosols production. Specify the function of propellants:
a. Stabilization
b. Action prolongation
*c. Create pressure in the package
d. Emulsification
e. Dispersion
2001. Proper harvesting of Frangula alnus herbal raw material greatly influences the quality and quantity of its active substances. Therefore the optimal time for buckthorn bark harvesting is the period of:
*a. Sap flow
b. Flowering
c. Defoliation
d. Fruiting
e. Dormancy
2002. Proper harvesting of Frangula alnus herbal raw material greatly influences the quality and quantity of its active substances. Therefore the optimal time for buckthorn bark harvesting is the period of:
a. Fruiting
*b. Sap flow
c. Flowering
d. Dormancy
e. Defoliation
2003. Proper harvesting of Frangula alnus herbal raw material greatly influences the quality and quantity of its active substances. Therefore the optimal time for buckthorn bark harvesting is the period of:
a. Fruiting
b. Flowering
c. Dormancy
*d. Sap flow
e. Defoliation
2004. Publicly-owned Isotope factory is the only manufacturer of radiopharmaceuticals in Ukraine. What type of distribution is characteristic of radioactive drugs?
*a. Exclusive
b. Bulk
c. Selective
d. Intensive
e. Sample
2005. Publicly-owned Isotope factory is the only manufacturer of radiopharmaceuticals in Ukraine. What type of distribution is characteristic of radioactive drugs?
a. Selective
b. Sample
c. Intensive
*d. Exclusive
e. Bulk
2006. Publicly-owned Isotope factory is the only manufacturer of radiopharmaceuticals in Ukraine. What type of distribution is characteristic of radioactive drugs?
a. Selective
b. Sample
c. Intensive
d. Bulk
*e. Exclusive
2007. Purpurea glycoside A and purpurea glycoside B are the main active substances of Digitalis purpurea. They belong to the following class of bioactive substances:
a. Anthracene derivatives
b. Flavonoids
*c. Cardiac glycosides
d. Alkaloids
e. Phenolic compounds
2008. Purpurea glycoside A and purpurea glycoside B are the main active substances of Digitalis purpurea. They belong to the following class of bioactive substances:
a. Phenolic compounds
*b. Cardiac glycosides
c. Flavonoids
d. Alkaloids
e. Anthracene derivatives
2009. Purpurea glycoside A and purpurea glycoside B are the main active substances of Digitalis purpurea. They belong to the following class of bioactive substances:
a. Phenolic compounds
b. Anthracene derivatives
*c. Cardiac glycosides
d. Alkaloids
e. Flavonoids
2010. Pyridoxine hydrochloride and cyanocobalamin are not recommended to be administered in the same syringe due to their chemical incompatibility. What type of chemical reaction occurs between these compounds?
a. Hydrolysis
*b. Complexation
c. Oxidation
d. Reduction
e. Neutralization
2011. Pyridoxine hydrochloride and cyanocobalamin are not recommended to be administered in the same syringe due to their chemical incompatibility. What type of chemical reaction occurs between these compounds?
a. Neutralization
b. Hydrolysis
c. Oxidation
d. Reduction
*e. Complexation
2012. Pyridoxine hydrochloride and cyanocobalamin are not recommended to be administered in the same syringe due to their chemical incompatibility. What type of chemical reaction occurs between these compounds?
a. Reduction
*b. Complexation
c. Hydrolysis
d. Neutralization
e. Oxidation
2013. Quality of dried extracts is assessed according to several criteria. Specify the highest acceptable amount of moisture in dried extracts according to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine:
a. 25%
b. 20%
*c. 5%
d. 95%
e. 75%
2014. Quality of dried extracts is assessed according to several criteria. Specify the highest acceptable amount of moisture in dried extracts according to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine:
a. 75%
b. 20%
c. 25%
d. 95%
*e. 5%
2015. Quality of dried extracts is assessed according to several criteria. Specify the highest acceptable amount of moisture in dried extracts according to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine:
a. 75%
b. 25%
*c. 5%
d. 20%
e. 95%
2016. Rectal suppositories, each containing 0.1 g of euphyllin (aminophylline), are being hand-rolled for the patient. What amount of vehicle should be taken for one suppository, if its mass is unspecified in the formulation?
a. 1.9 g
*b. 2.9 g
c. 2.4 g
d. 3.9 g
e. 1.4 g
2017. Rectal suppositories, each containing 0.1 g of euphyllin (aminophylline), are being hand-rolled for the patient. What amount of vehicle should be taken for one suppository, if its mass is unspecified in the formulation?
a. 2.4 g
b. 1.9 g
c. 3.9 g
*d. 2.9 g
e. 1.4 g
2018. Rectal suppositories, each containing 0.1 g of euphyllin (aminophylline), are being hand-rolled for the patient. What amount of vehicle should be taken for one suppository, if its mass is unspecified in the formulation?
a. 3.9 g
b. 1.4 g
c. 2.4 g
d. 1.9 g
*e. 2.9 g
2019. Representatives of the family Solanaceae are widely used in medical practice as alkaloid-containing plants. Which representative is the source for production of semi-synthetic steroid hormones?
*a. Solanum laciniatum
b. Hyoscyamus niger
c. Datura Stramonium
d. Solanum tuberosum
e. Atropa belladonna
2020. Representatives of the family Solanaceae are widely used in medical practice as alkaloid-containing plants. Which representative is the source for production of semi-synthetic steroid hormones?
a. Datura Stramonium
b. Atropa belladonna
c. Hyoscyamus niger
d. Solanum tuberosum
*e. Solanum laciniatum
2021. Representatives of the family Solanaceae are widely used in medical practice as alkaloid-containing plants. Which representative is the source for production of semi-synthetic steroid hormones?
a. Solanum tuberosum
*b. Solanum laciniatum
c. Datura Stramonium
d. Hyoscyamus niger
e. Atropa belladonna
2022. Representatives of two pharmaceutical companies - partners from Ukraine and China - for some time had communication problems due to the use of words and verbal symbols with different meanings. What caused the deformation of the communication process and hindered the exchange of information in this case?
a. Lack of understanding of the information's importance
b. Poor feedback
c. Psychological distance
*d. Semantic barriers
e. Nonverbal barriers
2023. Representatives of two pharmaceutical companies - partners from Ukraine and China - for some time had communication problems due to the use of words and verbal symbols with different meanings. What caused the deformation of the communication process and hindered the exchange of information in this case?
a. Lack of understanding of the information's importance
b. Psychological distance
*c. Semantic barriers
d. Nonverbal barriers
e. Poor feedback
2024. Representatives of two pharmaceutical companies - partners from Ukraine and China - for some time had communication problems due to the use of words and verbal symbols with different meanings. What caused the deformation of the communication process and hindered the exchange of information in this case?
a. Nonverbal barriers
b. Poor feedback
c. Lack of understanding of the information's importance
d. Psychological distance
*e. Semantic barriers
2025. Reye syndrome (encephalopathy, fatty degeneration of liver) develops as a side effect in children suffering from fever of viral origin when they take the following medicine:
*a. Acetylsalicylic acid
b. Ibuprofen
c. Paracetamol
d. Celecoxib
e. Metamizole sodium
2026. Reye syndrome (encephalopathy, fatty degeneration of liver) develops as a side effect in children suffering from fever of viral origin when they take the following medicine:
*a. Acetylsalicylic acid
b. Metamizole sodium
c. Ibuprofen
d. Celecoxib
e. Paracetamol
2027. Reye syndrome (encephalopathy, fatty degeneration of liver) develops as a side effect in children suffering from fever of viral origin when they take the following medicine:
a. Paracetamol
b. Celecoxib
*c. Acetylsalicylic acid
d. Ibuprofen
e. Metamizole sodium
2028. Rhamnus cathartica fruits contain anthracene derivatives. What qualitative reaction is used to determine the presence of these substances in a herbal raw material?
*a. Reaction with an alkali
b. Reaction with Molisch reagent
c. Reaction with iron(II) sulfate
d. Reaction with ammonium iron(III) sulfate
e. Reaction with Fehling reagent
2029. Rhamnus cathartica fruits contain anthracene derivatives. What qualitative reaction is used to determine the presence of these substances in a herbal raw material?
a. Reaction with Molisch reagent
b. Reaction with iron(II) sulfate
c. Reaction with Fehling reagent
*d. Reaction with an alkali
e. Reaction with ammonium iron(III) sulfate
2030. Rhamnus cathartica fruits contain anthracene derivatives. What qualitative reaction is used to determine the presence of these substances in a herbal raw material?
a. Reaction with iron(II) sulfate
b. Reaction with Molisch reagent
c. Reaction with Fehling reagent
d. Reaction with ammonium iron(III) sulfate
*e. Reaction with an alkali
2031. Sanguisorba officinalis herbal raw material contains tannins. What method must be used to determine their content according to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine?
*a. Permanganatometry
b. Nephelometry
c. Spectrophotometry
d. Chromatography
e. Photoelectrocolorimetry
2032. Sanguisorba officinalis herbal raw material contains tannins. What method must be used to determine their content according to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine?
*a. Permanganatometry
b. Spectrophotometry
c. Chromatography
d. Nephelometry
e. Photoelectrocolorimetry
2033. Sanguisorba officinalis herbal raw material contains tannins. What method must be used to determine their content according to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine?
a. Photoelectrocolorimetry
b. Chromatography
*c. Permanganatometry
d. Spectrophotometry
e. Nephelometry
2034. Schedule of sanitation actions in pharmacies is regulated by the relevant regulatory acts. Cleaning day at a pharmacy must be scheduled at least once:
*a. In a month
b. In a week
c. In 10 days
d. In 3 days
e. In 5 days
2035. Schedule of sanitation actions in pharmacies is regulated by the relevant regulatory acts. Cleaning day at a pharmacy must be scheduled at least once:
a. In 10 days
b. In a week
c. In 3 days
*d. In a month
e. In 5 days
2036. Schedule of sanitation actions in pharmacies is regulated by the relevant regulatory acts. Cleaning day at a pharmacy must be scheduled at least once:
a. In a week
b. In 3 days
c. In 10 days
d. In 5 days
*e. In a month
2037. Schisandra chinensis seeds contain lignans. What pharmacological effect will the preparations made of Schisandra chinensis have?
a. Antitumor
b. Reparative
c. Hepatoprotective
*d. Tonic
e. Sedative
2038. Schisandra chinensis seeds contain lignans. What pharmacological effect will the preparations made of Schisandra chinensis have?
a. Hepatoprotective
b. Antitumor
c. Reparative
*d. Tonic
e. Sedative
2039. Schisandra chinensis seeds contain lignans. What pharmacological effect will the preparations made of Schisandra chinensis have?
a. Reparative
*b. Tonic
c. Hepatoprotective
d. Antitumor
e. Sedative
2040. Select a non-steroid estrogen from the list below:
a. Adrenalin
b. Prednisolone
*c. Synoestrol (Hexestrol)
d. Progesterone
e. Retabolil (Nandrolone)
2041. Select a non-steroid estrogen from the list below:
a. Progesterone
b. Retabolil (Nandrolone)
c. Adrenalin
d. Prednisolone
*e. Synoestrol (Hexestrol)
2042. Select a non-steroid estrogen from the list below:
a. Retabolil (Nandrolone)
b. Adrenalin
c. Progesterone
d. Prednisolone
*e. Synoestrol (Hexestrol)
2043. Select from the list a medical substance that is an indole derivative:
a. Diazepam
b. Dibazol (Bendazol)
c. Glaucine hydrochloride
d. Isoniazid
*e. Indometacin
2044. Select from the list a medical substance that is an indole derivative:
a. Glaucine hydrochloride
b. Diazepam
c. Isoniazid
*d. Indometacin
e. Dibazol (Bendazol)
2045. Select from the list a medical substance that is an indole derivative:
a. Isoniazid
*b. Indometacin
c. Dibazol (Bendazol)
d. Glaucine hydrochloride
e. Diazepam
2046. Senna (cassia) foliage contains anthracene derivatives. Their presence can be confirmed by qualitative reaction with:
*a. Alkali
b. Fehling's reagent
c. Molisch's reagent
d. Iron ammonium alum
e. Iron (II) sulfate
2047. Senna (cassia) foliage contains anthracene derivatives. Their presence can be confirmed by qualitative reaction with:
a. Iron (II) sulfate
b. Molisch's reagent
*c. Alkali
d. Fehling's reagent
e. Iron ammonium alum
2048. Senna (cassia) foliage contains anthracene derivatives. Their presence can be confirmed by qualitative reaction with:
a. Molisch's reagent
b. Fehling's reagent
*c. Alkali
d. Iron ammonium alum
e. Iron (II) sulfate
2049. Senna leaves decoction is being prepared in a pharmacy. The following is characteristic of the process of making an aqueous infusion of senna leaves:
*a. Decoction is made and filtered after complete cooling
b. Infusion is made by means of cold maceration
c. Infusion is made in a slightly alkaline medium
d. Infusion is made and acidated with hydrochloric acid
e. Decoction is made and filtered immediately without cooling
2050. Senna leaves decoction is being prepared in a pharmacy. The following is characteristic of the process of making an aqueous infusion of senna leaves:
a. Decoction is made and filtered immediately without cooling
*b. Decoction is made and filtered after complete cooling
c. Infusion is made and acidated with hydrochloric acid
d. Infusion is made in a slightly alkaline medium
e. Infusion is made by means of cold maceration
2051. Senna leaves decoction is being prepared in a pharmacy. The following is characteristic of the process of making an aqueous infusion of senna leaves:
a. Decoction is made and filtered immediately without cooling
*b. Decoction is made and filtered after complete cooling
c. Infusion is made in a slightly alkaline medium
d. Infusion is made by means of cold maceration
e. Infusion is made and acidated with hydrochloric acid
2052. Several cholesterol gallstones are detected in the gallbladder of a woman. Choose the drug to dissolve and excrete the stones:
*a. Ursodeoxycholic acid
b. Domperidone
c. Loperamide
d. Platyphyllin
e. Papaverine
2053. Several cholesterol gallstones are detected in the gallbladder of a woman. Choose the drug to dissolve and excrete the stones:
a. Domperidone
b. Papaverine
c. Loperamide
d. Platyphyllin
*e. Ursodeoxycholic acid
2054. Several cholesterol gallstones are detected in the gallbladder of a woman. Choose the drug to dissolve and excrete the stones:
a. Platyphyllin
b. Papaverine
*c. Ursodeoxycholic acid
d. Domperidone
e. Loperamide
2055. Several independent mediators work in resale of medical equipment. What group of mediators includes persons and legal entities that specialize in sales of durable goods that require considerabe after-sales service?
*a. Dealer
b. Agent
c. Broker
d. Consignee
e. Commission agent
2056. Several independent mediators work in resale of medical equipment. What group of mediators includes persons and legal entities that specialize in sales of durable goods that require considerabe after-sales service?
a. Agent
b. Broker
*c. Dealer
d. Commission agent
e. Consignee
2057. Several independent mediators work in resale of medical equipment. What group of mediators includes persons and legal entities that specialize in sales of durable goods that require considerabe after-sales service?
a. Agent
b. Commission agent
c. Broker
*d. Dealer
e. Consignee
2058. Several species of Polygonum genus are used in medicine. One of these species has rootstocks rich in tanning agents, which are used to treat diarrrhea. Name this species:
*a. Polygonum bistorta
b. Polygonum persicaria
c. Polygonum aviculare
d. Polygonum hydropiper
e. Polygonum alpinum
2059. Several species of Polygonum genus are used in medicine. One of these species has rootstocks rich in tanning agents, which are used to treat diarrrhea. Name this species:
a. Polygonum alpinum
b. Polygonum aviculare
*c. Polygonum bistorta
d. Polygonum persicaria
e. Polygonum hydropiper
2060. Several species of Polygonum genus are used in medicine. One of these species has rootstocks rich in tanning agents, which are used to treat diarrrhea. Name this species:
a. Polygonum persicaria
*b. Polygonum bistorta
c. Polygonum aviculare
d. Polygonum hydropiper
e. Polygonum alpinum
2061. Silibor is a herbal drug that is used as a hepatoprotector. This drug is made from:
*a. Semina Sylibi
b. Herba Equiseti arvensis
c. Flores Centaureae cyani
d. Flores Crataegi
e. Flores Tanaceti
2062. Silibor is a herbal drug that is used as a hepatoprotector. This drug is made from:
a. Flores Crataegi
b. Flores Centaureae cyani
c. Herba Equiseti arvensis
*d. Semina Sylibi
e. Flores Tanaceti
2063. Silibor is a herbal drug that is used as a hepatoprotector. This drug is made from:
a. Flores Tanaceti
*b. Semina Sylibi
c. Herba Equiseti arvensis
d. Flores Centaureae cyani
e. Flores Crataegi
2064. Simultaneous application of doxycycline hydrochloride and oral contraceptive causes:
a. -
b. Increase of the antibacterial effect of doxycycline
*c. Reduction of oral contraceptives effectiveness
d. Increase of oral contraceptives effectiveness
e. Reduction of the antibacterial effect of doxycycline
2065. Simultaneous application of doxycycline hydrochloride and oral contraceptive causes:
a. Increase of oral contraceptives effectiveness
b. -
c. Reduction of the antibacterial effect of doxycycline
*d. Reduction of oral contraceptives effectiveness
e. Increase of the antibacterial effect of doxycycline
2066. Simultaneous application of doxycycline hydrochloride and oral contraceptive causes:
a. Increase of the antibacterial effect of doxycycline
b. -
c. Increase of oral contraceptives effectiveness
*d. Reduction of oral contraceptives effectiveness
e. Reduction of the antibacterial effect of doxycycline
2067. Snake venom-based drugs are widely applied in treatment of locomotor apparatus diseases. Main components of these venoms are:
*a. Toxic proteins
b. Phenol-alcohols
c. Alkaloids
d. Cardiac glycosides
e. Glucosinolates
2068. Snake venom-based drugs are widely applied in treatment of locomotor apparatus diseases. Main components of these venoms are:
a. Cardiac glycosides
*b. Toxic proteins
c. Phenol-alcohols
d. Alkaloids
e. Glucosinolates
2069. Snake venom-based drugs are widely applied in treatment of locomotor apparatus diseases. Main components of these venoms are:
a. Phenol-alcohols
*b. Toxic proteins
c. Alkaloids
d. Glucosinolates
e. Cardiac glycosides
2070. Sodium and potassium oxides are introduced into the ampoule glass to:
*a. Decrease its melting point
b. Increase its mechanical stability
c. Increase its thermal stability
d. Increase its dimming ability
e. Increase its chemical stability
2071. Sodium and potassium oxides are introduced into the ampoule glass to:
a. Increase its dimming ability
b. Increase its thermal stability
c. Increase its mechanical stability
*d. Decrease its melting point
e. Increase its chemical stability
2072. Sodium and potassium oxides are introduced into the ampoule glass to:
a. Increase its thermal stability
b. Increase its mechanical stability
c. Increase its dimming ability
*d. Decrease its melting point
e. Increase its chemical stability
2073. Soft gelatin capsules with an elongated neck are called:
*a. Tubatines
b. Rectal capsules
c. Medules
d. Microcapsules
e. Spansules
2074. Soft gelatin capsules with an elongated neck are called:
a. Medules
*b. Tubatines
c. Spansules
d. Microcapsules
e. Rectal capsules
2075. Soft gelatin capsules with an elongated neck are called:
a. Microcapsules
*b. Tubatines
c. Medules
d. Spansules
e. Rectal capsules
2076. Solutions of protected forms of colloids are used in medical practice. What substance is a protected colloid?
*a. Protargol
b. Basic bismuth nitrate
c. Potassium iodide
d. Sodium chloride
e. Camphor
2077. Solutions of protected forms of colloids are used in medical practice. What substance is a protected colloid?
a. Basic bismuth nitrate
*b. Protargol
c. Camphor
d. Sodium chloride
e. Potassium iodide
2078. Solutions of protected forms of colloids are used in medical practice. What substance is a protected colloid?
a. Sodium chloride
b. Camphor
*c. Protargol
d. Basic bismuth nitrate
e. Potassium iodide
2079. Specialists of a pharmaceutical enterprice confirm the identity of Cassia acutifolia herbal raw material. During reaction with alkali it developed cherry-red coloring. What substances were identified?
a. Alkaloids
*b. Anthraquinones
c. Glycosides
d. Tannins
e. Iridoids
2080. Specialists of a pharmaceutical enterprice confirm the identity of Cassia acutifolia herbal raw material. During reaction with alkali it developed cherry-red coloring. What substances were identified?
a. Iridoids
b. Tannins
c. Alkaloids
*d. Anthraquinones
e. Glycosides
2081. Specialists of a pharmaceutical enterprice confirm the identity of Cassia acutifolia herbal raw material. During reaction with alkali it developed cherry-red coloring. What substances were identified?
a. Tannins
b. Iridoids
c. Glycosides
d. Alkaloids
*e. Anthraquinones
2082. Specify a potent herbal raw material, infusion from which is made in 1:400 ratio:
*a. Foxglove leaves
b. Althaea roots
c. Motherwort grass
d. Valerian roots and rhizomes
e. Sage leaves
2083. Specify a potent herbal raw material, infusion from which is made in 1:400 ratio:
a. Althaea roots
b. Valerian roots and rhizomes
*c. Foxglove leaves
d. Sage leaves
e. Motherwort grass
2084. Specify a potent herbal raw material, infusion from which is made in 1:400 ratio:
a. Motherwort grass
b. Valerian roots and rhizomes
*c. Foxglove leaves
d. Althaea roots
e. Sage leaves
2085. Specify the control methods aimed at detecting mechanical impurities in parenteral solutions:
a. Amperometric
*b. Visual optical
c. NMR and UV-visible spectroscopy
d. Gravitational
e. Limulus test
2086. Specify the control methods aimed at detecting mechanical impurities in parenteral solutions:
a. NMR and UV-visible spectroscopy
*b. Visual optical
c. Limulus test
d. Amperometric
e. Gravitational
2087. Specify the control methods aimed at detecting mechanical impurities in parenteral solutions:
a. NMR and UV-visible spectroscopy
b. Limulus test
c. Amperometric
d. Gravitational
*e. Visual optical
2088. Specify the drugs recommended for prevention and correction of dysbiotic problems caused by antibiotic therapy:
*a. Probiotics
b. Antacids
c. Prokinetics
d. Choleretics
e. Uroseptics
2089. Specify the drugs recommended for prevention and correction of dysbiotic problems caused by antibiotic therapy:
a. Prokinetics
*b. Probiotics
c. Antacids
d. Choleretics
e. Uroseptics
2090. Specify the drugs recommended for prevention and correction of dysbiotic problems caused by antibiotic therapy:
a. Prokinetics
b. Uroseptics
c. Antacids
d. Choleretics
*e. Probiotics
2091. Specify the fluid used to coat the forms for pouring of the suppositories with hydrophilic vehicles:
a. Dimethylsulfoxide
b. Purified water
c. Glycerine
*d. Vaseline (petroleum jelly)
e. Glycerine-water solution
2092. Specify the fluid used to coat the forms for pouring of the suppositories with hydrophilic vehicles:
a. Glycerine
b. Purified water
c. Dimethylsulfoxide
d. Glycerine-water solution
*e. Vaseline (petroleum jelly)
2093. Specify the fluid used to coat the forms for pouring of the suppositories with hydrophilic vehicles:
a. Purified water
b. Dimethylsulfoxide
*c. Vaseline (petroleum jelly)
d. Glycerine
e. Glycerine-water solution
2094. Specify the formula of extractant calculation in the process of creating a tincture:
*a. V = V_tincture + m _raw materialcdot K_alcohol absorption
b. m_raw material = m_end product + m_losses
c. V = V_tincture cdot n + m _raw materialcdot K_alcohol absorption
d. mu = frac m_end productm_raw material cdot 100%
e. E = frac m_lossesm_raw material cdot 100%
2095. Specify the formula of extractant calculation in the process of creating a tincture:
a. E = frac m_lossesm_raw material cdot 100%
b. mu = frac m_end productm_raw material cdot 100%
c. m_raw material = m_end product + m_losses
d. V = V_tincture cdot n + m _raw materialcdot K_alcohol absorption
*e. V = V_tincture + m _raw materialcdot K_alcohol absorption
2096. Specify the formula of extractant calculation in the process of creating a tincture:
a. mu = frac m_end productm_raw material cdot 100%
*b. V = V_tincture + m _raw materialcdot K_alcohol absorption
c. V = V_tincture cdot n + m _raw materialcdot K_alcohol absorption
d. E = frac m_lossesm_raw material cdot 100%
e. m_raw material = m_end product + m_losses
2097. Specify the indicator that measures the total contribution of various solutes to the osmotic pressure of the solution:
*a. Osmolality
b. Isohydricity
c. Isoviscosity
d. Isotonicity
e. Apyrogenicity
2098. Specify the indicator that measures the total contribution of various solutes to the osmotic pressure of the solution:
a. Isohydricity
b. Isotonicity
c. Isoviscosity
*d. Osmolality
e. Apyrogenicity
2099. Specify the indicator that measures the total contribution of various solutes to the osmotic pressure of the solution:
a. Isotonicity
b. Isoviscosity
c. Isohydricity
d. Apyrogenicity
*e. Osmolality
2100. Specify the isotonic concentration of a sodium chloride solution:
*a. 0.9%
b. 1.0%
c. 5.0%
d. 1.8%
e. 10.0%
2101. Specify the isotonic concentration of a sodium chloride solution:
a. 10.0%
b. 1.0%
c. 1.8%
*d. 0.9%
e. 5.0%
2102. Specify the optimal method for industrial production of suppositories:
*a. Pouring into moulds
b. Pressing
c. Lyophilization
d. Hand-rolling
e. Stamping
2103. Specify the optimal method for industrial production of suppositories:
a. Lyophilization
b. Stamping
*c. Pouring into moulds
d. Hand-rolling
e. Pressing
2104. Specify the optimal method for industrial production of suppositories:
a. Pressing
b. Hand-rolling
c. Stamping
d. Lyophilization
*e. Pouring into moulds
2105. Spectrophotometric analysis of anthracene derivatives contained in buckthorn bark is based on the following reaction:
a. Anthraquinone reduction
b. Sublimation
c. Oxidation of anthracene derivatives
*d. Production of phenolates with alkali-ammonia solution
e. Salt precipitation
2106. Spectrophotometric analysis of anthracene derivatives contained in buckthorn bark is based on the following reaction:
a. Sublimation
*b. Production of phenolates with alkali-ammonia solution
c. Anthraquinone reduction
d. Oxidation of anthracene derivatives
e. Salt precipitation
2107. Spectrophotometric analysis of anthracene derivatives contained in buckthorn bark is based on the following reaction:
a. Sublimation
b. Oxidation of anthracene derivatives
c. Anthraquinone reduction
*d. Production of phenolates with alkali-ammonia solution
e. Salt precipitation
2108. Standard herbal material of lily-of-the-valley is obtained by drying it at a temperature of 50-60^oC to prevent the following possible biochemical process:
*a. Enzymatic hydrolysis of cardiac glycosides
b. Oxidation of resins
c. Oxidation of terpenoids
d. Volatilization of essential oils
e. Oxidation of phenolic compounds
2109. Standard herbal material of lily-of-the-valley is obtained by drying it at a temperature of 50-60^oC to prevent the following possible biochemical process:
a. Oxidation of terpenoids
b. Oxidation of phenolic compounds
*c. Enzymatic hydrolysis of cardiac glycosides
d. Oxidation of resins
e. Volatilization of essential oils
2110. Standard herbal material of lily-of-the-valley is obtained by drying it at a temperature of 50-60^oC to prevent the following possible biochemical process:
a. Oxidation of terpenoids
b. Oxidation of resins
c. Volatilization of essential oils
*d. Enzymatic hydrolysis of cardiac glycosides
e. Oxidation of phenolic compounds
2111. Standard stactometer divides 1 ml of water into:
*a. 20 drops
b. 25 drops
c. 10 drops
d. 30 drops
e. 15 drops
2112. Standard stactometer divides 1 ml of water into:
a. 25 drops
b. 10 drops
c. 15 drops
*d. 20 drops
e. 30 drops
2113. Standard stactometer divides 1 ml of water into:
a. 25 drops
b. 15 drops
c. 30 drops
d. 10 drops
*e. 20 drops
2114. Standardization of a certain herbal raw material is done by calculating its alkaloid content in terms of hyoscyamine. Name this herbal raw material:
a. Fructus Capsici
*b. Folia Belladonnae
c. Herba Thermopsidis lanceolatae
d. Herba Chelidonii
e. Radices Berberidis
2115. Standardization of a certain herbal raw material is done by calculating its alkaloid content in terms of hyoscyamine. Name this herbal raw material:
a. Herba Thermopsidis lanceolatae
b. Fructus Capsici
c. Herba Chelidonii
*d. Folia Belladonnae
e. Radices Berberidis
2116. Standardization of a certain herbal raw material is done by calculating its alkaloid content in terms of hyoscyamine. Name this herbal raw material:
a. Herba Thermopsidis lanceolatae
b. Radices Berberidis
c. Herba Chelidonii
d. Fructus Capsici
*e. Folia Belladonnae
2117. Storage of medical products in pharmacies is carried out in compliance with the law. What relative humidity is necessary for storage of rubber products to prevent their drying and deformation?
*a. At least 65%
b. At least 40%
c. At least 30%
d. At least 50%
e. At least 20%
2118. Storage of medical products in pharmacies is carried out in compliance with the law. What relative humidity is necessary for storage of rubber products to prevent their drying and deformation?
a. At least 20%
b. At least 30%
*c. At least 65%
d. At least 50%
e. At least 40%
2119. Storage of medical products in pharmacies is carried out in compliance with the law. What relative humidity is necessary for storage of rubber products to prevent their drying and deformation?
a. At least 30%
*b. At least 65%
c. At least 40%
d. At least 20%
e. At least 50%
2120. Strategic planning of pharmaceutical companies consists of several consecutive stages. What stage is the final one?
a. Choice of strategy
*b. Strategy assessment
c. Setting goals and tasks
d. Analysis of organisation's internal strength and weaknesses
e. Environment assessment and analysis
2121. Strategic planning of pharmaceutical companies consists of several consecutive stages. What stage is the final one?
a. Choice of strategy
b. Setting goals and tasks
*c. Strategy assessment
d. Environment assessment and analysis
e. Analysis of organisation's internal strength and weaknesses
2122. Strategic planning of pharmaceutical companies consists of several consecutive stages. What stage is the final one?
a. Setting goals and tasks
b. Analysis of organisation's internal strength and weaknesses
c. Choice of strategy
d. Environment assessment and analysis
*e. Strategy assessment
2123. Suspension stability increases, when the substances that increase the viscosity of a continuous medium are introduced to a suspension. Specify a substance that has such a property:
a. Atropa belladonna tincture
*b. Glycerine
c. Purified water
d. Dimexide (dimethyl sulfoxide)
e. Ethyl alcohol
2124. Suspension stability increases, when the substances that increase the viscosity of a continuous medium are introduced to a suspension. Specify a substance that has such a property:
a. Ethyl alcohol
*b. Glycerine
c. Purified water
d. Dimexide (dimethyl sulfoxide)
e. Atropa belladonna tincture
2125. Suspension stability increases, when the substances that increase the viscosity of a continuous medium are introduced to a suspension. Specify a substance that has such a property:
a. Ethyl alcohol
b. Purified water
c. Dimexide (dimethyl sulfoxide)
*d. Glycerine
e. Atropa belladonna tincture
2126. Taxes can be divided into direct and indirect. Select an indirect tax from the list:
*a. Value added tax
b. Individual income tax
c. Corporate income tax
d. Rent
e. Real estate tax
2127. Taxes can be divided into direct and indirect. Select an indirect tax from the list:
a. Corporate income tax
*b. Value added tax
c. Rent
d. Individual income tax
e. Real estate tax
2128. Taxes can be divided into direct and indirect. Select an indirect tax from the list:
a. Real estate tax
b. Rent
c. Individual income tax
d. Corporate income tax
*e. Value added tax
2129. Tell the patient, what side effect is associated with systemic glucocorticosteroid therapy.
*a. Osteoporosis
b. Hypoglycemia
c. Hypotension
d. Jaundice
e. Constipation
2130. Tell the patient, what side effect is associated with systemic glucocorticosteroid therapy.
a. Hypoglycemia
b. Jaundice
*c. Osteoporosis
d. Hypotension
e. Constipation
2131. Tell the patient, what side effect is associated with systemic glucocorticosteroid therapy.
a. Jaundice
b. Hypoglycemia
c. Constipation
*d. Osteoporosis
e. Hypotension
2132. Testing of a calcium lactate pentahydrate substance requires a reaction with a solution of thioglycolic acid in the presence of citric acid and an ammonia solution. What impurity can be detected using this reaction?
*a. Iron
b. Chlorides
c. Ammonium salts
d. Potassium
e. Sulfates
2133. Testing of a calcium lactate pentahydrate substance requires a reaction with a solution of thioglycolic acid in the presence of citric acid and an ammonia solution. What impurity can be detected using this reaction?
a. Chlorides
b. Potassium
c. Sulfates
d. Ammonium salts
*e. Iron
2134. Testing of a calcium lactate pentahydrate substance requires a reaction with a solution of thioglycolic acid in the presence of citric acid and an ammonia solution. What impurity can be detected using this reaction?
a. Potassium
b. Chlorides
*c. Iron
d. Sulfates
e. Ammonium salts
2135. The ''Aromeline'' phytodrug exhibits P-vitamin activity. What herbal raw material is used in production of this drug?
*a. Fructus Aroniae melanocarpae
b. Fructus Crataegi
c. Fructus Sambuci nigrae
d. Fructus Viburni
e. Fructus Sorbi
2136. The ''Aromeline'' phytodrug exhibits P-vitamin activity. What herbal raw material is used in production of this drug?
a. Fructus Crataegi
*b. Fructus Aroniae melanocarpae
c. Fructus Sorbi
d. Fructus Sambuci nigrae
e. Fructus Viburni
2137. The ''Aromeline'' phytodrug exhibits P-vitamin activity. What herbal raw material is used in production of this drug?
a. Fructus Viburni
b. Fructus Sorbi
*c. Fructus Aroniae melanocarpae
d. Fructus Sambuci nigrae
e. Fructus Crataegi
2138. The ''Bon-pharn'' pharmaceutical company due to its constant financial support of international sports competitions became well-known in Ukraine and the neighbouring countries. What type of activity is described in this case?
a. Direct marketing
*b. Sponsorship
c. Publicity
d. Lobbying
e. Product promotion
2139. The ''Bon-pharn'' pharmaceutical company due to its constant financial support of international sports competitions became well-known in Ukraine and the neighbouring countries. What type of activity is described in this case?
a. Direct marketing
b. Product promotion
c. Publicity
d. Lobbying
*e. Sponsorship
2140. The ''Bon-pharn'' pharmaceutical company due to its constant financial support of international sports competitions became well-known in Ukraine and the neighbouring countries. What type of activity is described in this case?
a. Product promotion
b. Direct marketing
*c. Sponsorship
d. Lobbying
e. Publicity
2141. The ''Dr Ram'' pharmaceutical company organizes scientific conferences and workshops for doctors and pharmaceutical workers. What element of marketing communications is used by this pharmaceutical company?
*a. Public relations
b. Personal selling
c. Sales stimulation
d. Direct marketing
e. Merchandising
2142. The ''Dr Ram'' pharmaceutical company organizes scientific conferences and workshops for doctors and pharmaceutical workers. What element of marketing communications is used by this pharmaceutical company?
a. Sales stimulation
*b. Public relations
c. Personal selling
d. Direct marketing
e. Merchandising
2143. The ''Dr Ram'' pharmaceutical company organizes scientific conferences and workshops for doctors and pharmaceutical workers. What element of marketing communications is used by this pharmaceutical company?
a. Sales stimulation
b. Personal selling
c. Direct marketing
*d. Public relations
e. Merchandising
2144. The ''Medpharm'' wholesale pharmaceutical firm employs a system that encourages its managers to achieve better results in sales by assigning them points for surpassing their sale goals. The points then become converted into material remuneration. This way the company management carries out the following management function:
*a. Motivation
b. Delegation
c. Control
d. Planning
e. Organization
2145. The ''Medpharm'' wholesale pharmaceutical firm employs a system that encourages its managers to achieve better results in sales by assigning them points for surpassing their sale goals. The points then become converted into material remuneration. This way the company management carries out the following management function:
*a. Motivation
b. Delegation
c. Planning
d. Organization
e. Control
2146. The ''Medpharm'' wholesale pharmaceutical firm employs a system that encourages its managers to achieve better results in sales by assigning them points for surpassing their sale goals. The points then become converted into material remuneration. This way the company management carries out the following management function:
a. Control
*b. Motivation
c. Planning
d. Delegation
e. Organization
2147. The ''Pharmastar'' pharmaceutical company develops new dosage forms for its medicines. What type of product policy in marketing is it?
a. Modernization
b. Reduction
*c. Product modification
d. Differentiation
e. Diversification
2148. The ''Pharmastar'' pharmaceutical company develops new dosage forms for its medicines. What type of product policy in marketing is it?
a. Modernization
b. Reduction
*c. Product modification
d. Diversification
e. Differentiation
2149. The ''Pharmastar'' pharmaceutical company develops new dosage forms for its medicines. What type of product policy in marketing is it?
a. Reduction
b. Differentiation
*c. Product modification
d. Modernization
e. Diversification
2150. The <<Violet>> pharmacy chain operates in the pharmaceutical market for over 20 years. In difficult market environment, the company's management actively uses elements of crisis management, diversification, and attraction of investments. What component of the successful activity of the pharmaceutical organization does the company provide?
*a. Survival
b. Effectiveness
c. Productivity
d. Practical implementation of  management decisions
e. Efficiency
2151. The <<Violet>> pharmacy chain operates in the pharmaceutical market for over 20 years. In difficult market environment, the company's management actively uses elements of crisis management, diversification, and attraction of investments. What component of the successful activity of the pharmaceutical organization does the company provide?
a. Practical implementation of  management decisions
b. Productivity
c. Effectiveness
d. Efficiency
*e. Survival
2152. The <<Violet>> pharmacy chain operates in the pharmaceutical market for over 20 years. In difficult market environment, the company's management actively uses elements of crisis management, diversification, and attraction of investments. What component of the successful activity of the pharmaceutical organization does the company provide?
a. Productivity
b. Effectiveness
c. Efficiency
*d. Survival
e. Practical implementation of  management decisions
2153. The Dobropharma pharmacy manager makes plans for standard stock of various groups of goods, based on their purpose. Convenience goods belong to the following group:
a. Seasonal accumulation
*b. Current demand
c. Specific demand
d. Prior delivery
e. Single delivery
2154. The Dobropharma pharmacy manager makes plans for standard stock of various groups of goods, based on their purpose. Convenience goods belong to the following group:
a. Single delivery
b. Seasonal accumulation
*c. Current demand
d. Prior delivery
e. Specific demand
2155. The Dobropharma pharmacy manager makes plans for standard stock of various groups of goods, based on their purpose. Convenience goods belong to the following group:
a. Single delivery
b. Seasonal accumulation
*c. Current demand
d. Specific demand
e. Prior delivery
2156. The Income Statement of a pharmacy for the first quarter of 20XX contains the following entries: goods turnover - 45 000 UAH, production cost of products sold - 30 000 UAH, turnover costs - 10 000 UAH. Determine the income:
*a. 5 000 UAH
b. 35 000 UAH
c. 15 000 UAH
d. 40 000 UAH
e. 30 000 UAH
2157. The Income Statement of a pharmacy for the first quarter of 20XX contains the following entries: goods turnover - 45 000 UAH, production cost of products sold - 30 000 UAH, turnover costs - 10 000 UAH. Determine the income:
a. 35 000 UAH
b. 15 000 UAH
c. 40 000 UAH
d. 30 000 UAH
*e. 5 000 UAH
2158. The Income Statement of a pharmacy for the first quarter of 20XX contains the following entries: goods turnover - 45 000 UAH, production cost of products sold - 30 000 UAH, turnover costs - 10 000 UAH. Determine the income:
a. 40 000 UAH
b. 30 000 UAH
c. 35 000 UAH
*d. 5 000 UAH
e. 15 000 UAH
2159. The addition of preservatives and stabilizers is prohibited, when making the following dosage forms:
*a. Dosage forms for newborns
b. Emulsions
c. Suspensions
d. Ophthalmic dosage forms
e. Infusions
2160. The addition of preservatives and stabilizers is prohibited, when making the following dosage forms:
a. Ophthalmic dosage forms
b. Suspensions
c. Emulsions
d. Infusions
*e. Dosage forms for newborns
2161. The addition of preservatives and stabilizers is prohibited, when making the following dosage forms:
a. Suspensions
b. Infusions
c. Ophthalmic dosage forms
d. Emulsions
*e. Dosage forms for newborns
2162. The amount of temporary disability benefits to be paid is calculated taking into account the insured record of service of an employee. What percentage of temporary disability benefits will be paid to an employee with a disability certificate and more than 8-year-long insured record of service?
*a. 100% of salary
b. 50% of salary
c. 90% of salary
d. 75% of salary
e. 60% of salary
2163. The amount of temporary disability benefits to be paid is calculated taking into account the insured record of service of an employee. What percentage of temporary disability benefits will be paid to an employee with a disability certificate and more than 8-year-long insured record of service?
a. 50% of salary
b. 90% of salary
c. 75% of salary
*d. 100% of salary
e. 60% of salary
2164. The amount of temporary disability benefits to be paid is calculated taking into account the insured record of service of an employee. What percentage of temporary disability benefits will be paid to an employee with a disability certificate and more than 8-year-long insured record of service?
a. 90% of salary
*b. 100% of salary
c. 50% of salary
d. 60% of salary
e. 75% of salary
2165. The ampoule workshop of a factory produces a 5% oil-based solution of tocopherol acetate for injections. What filling technique should be used to fill the ampoules with this solution?
a. Syringe and vapor condensation
b. Vapor condensation
*c. Syringe
d. Syringe and vacuum
e. Vacuum
2166. The ampoule workshop of a factory produces a 5% oil-based solution of tocopherol acetate for injections. What filling technique should be used to fill the ampoules with this solution?
a. Vacuum
b. Vapor condensation
c. Syringe and vapor condensation
*d. Syringe
e. Syringe and vacuum
2167. The ampoule workshop of a factory produces a 5% oil-based solution of tocopherol acetate for injections. What filling technique should be used to fill the ampoules with this solution?
a. Vapor condensation
b. Vacuum
*c. Syringe
d. Syringe and vapor condensation
e. Syringe and vacuum
2168. The analyst determines quantitative content of sodium benzoate by means of acidimetry in non-aqueous medium according to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine. What reagent is used as a solvent in this case?
*a. Anhydrous acetic acid
b. Sulfanilic acid
c. Concentrated sulfuric acid
d. Dimethyl formamide
e. Pyridine
2169. The analyst determines quantitative content of sodium benzoate by means of acidimetry in non-aqueous medium according to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine. What reagent is used as a solvent in this case?
a. Dimethyl formamide
*b. Anhydrous acetic acid
c. Sulfanilic acid
d. Pyridine
e. Concentrated sulfuric acid
2170. The analyst determines quantitative content of sodium benzoate by means of acidimetry in non-aqueous medium according to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine. What reagent is used as a solvent in this case?
a. Pyridine
b. Sulfanilic acid
*c. Anhydrous acetic acid
d. Dimethyl formamide
e. Concentrated sulfuric acid
2171. The analytical laboratory received calcium chloride. What volumetric solution should be used for quantitative determination of this medicinal substance?
*a. Sodium edetate
b. Potassium bromate
c. Sodium hydroxide
d. Hydrochloric acid
e. Potassium permanganate
2172. The analytical laboratory received calcium chloride. What volumetric solution should be used for quantitative determination of this medicinal substance?
*a. Sodium edetate
b. Potassium permanganate
c. Sodium hydroxide
d. Hydrochloric acid
e. Potassium bromate
2173. The analytical laboratory received calcium chloride. What volumetric solution should be used for quantitative determination of this medicinal substance?
a. Potassium permanganate
b. Hydrochloric acid
c. Sodium hydroxide
*d. Sodium edetate
e. Potassium bromate
2174. The calculation of isotonic concentration using the cryoscopic method is based on the following law:
a. -
*b. Raoult's law
c. Clapeyron-Mendeleev equation
d. Boyle-Mariotte law
e. Dalton's law
2175. The calculation of isotonic concentration using the cryoscopic method is based on the following law:
a. Dalton's law
b. -
*c. Raoult's law
d. Clapeyron-Mendeleev equation
e. Boyle-Mariotte law
2176. The calculation of isotonic concentration using the cryoscopic method is based on the following law:
a. Dalton's law
b. -
c. Boyle-Mariotte law
*d. Raoult's law
e. Clapeyron-Mendeleev equation
2177. The cashier of a pharmacy must record all receipt and withdrawal cash transactions in the relevant documents. What document must be drawn up for issuing cash sums to be accounted for?
*a. Disbursement cash order
b. Cashier's check
c. Expense invoice
d. Receipt for issuing money
e. Profit invoice
2178. The cashier of a pharmacy must record all receipt and withdrawal cash transactions in the relevant documents. What document must be drawn up for issuing cash sums to be accounted for?
a. Cashier's check
b. Expense invoice
c. Profit invoice
*d. Disbursement cash order
e. Receipt for issuing money
2179. The cashier of a pharmacy must record all receipt and withdrawal cash transactions in the relevant documents. What document must be drawn up for issuing cash sums to be accounted for?
a. Profit invoice
b. Expense invoice
c. Receipt for issuing money
d. Cashier's check
*e. Disbursement cash order
2180. The chemical name of 2,2-(diphenylmethoxy)-N,N-dimethyl-ethanamine hydrochloride corresponds with the following medicinal substance:
a. Ethylmorphine hydrochloride
b. Ciprofloxacin hydrochloride
*c. Diphenhydramine hydrochloride
d. Papaverine hydrochloride
e. Lidocaine hydrochloride
2181. The chemical name of 2,2-(diphenylmethoxy)-N,N-dimethyl-ethanamine hydrochloride corresponds with the following medicinal substance:
a. Ethylmorphine hydrochloride
b. Lidocaine hydrochloride
c. Papaverine hydrochloride
*d. Diphenhydramine hydrochloride
e. Ciprofloxacin hydrochloride
2182. The chemical name of 2,2-(diphenylmethoxy)-N,N-dimethyl-ethanamine hydrochloride corresponds with the following medicinal substance:
a. Lidocaine hydrochloride
b. Papaverine hydrochloride
c. Ciprofloxacin hydrochloride
d. Ethylmorphine hydrochloride
*e. Diphenhydramine hydrochloride
2183. The chemical name of 2-benzyl-1H-benzimidazole hydrochloride corresponds with the following medicinal substance:
a. Indometacin
*b. Dibazol (Bendazolum)
c. Omeprazole
d. Phenazepam
e. Vicasol (Menadione)
2184. The chemical name of 2-benzyl-1H-benzimidazole hydrochloride corresponds with the following medicinal substance:
a. Indometacin
b. Omeprazole
*c. Dibazol (Bendazolum)
d. Vicasol (Menadione)
e. Phenazepam
2185. The chemical name of 2-benzyl-1H-benzimidazole hydrochloride corresponds with the following medicinal substance:
a. Omeprazole
b. Vicasol (Menadione)
c. Phenazepam
*d. Dibazol (Bendazolum)
e. Indometacin
2186. The chemical name of 5-Nitro-8-hydroxyquinoline corresponds whith the following drug:
a. Chingamin (Chloroquine)
*b. Nitroxoline
c. Quinocide
d. Dibazol (Bendazol)
e. Ofloxacin
2187. The chemical name of 5-Nitro-8-hydroxyquinoline corresponds whith the following drug:
a. Dibazol (Bendazol)
b. Ofloxacin
c. Quinocide
d. Chingamin (Chloroquine)
*e. Nitroxoline
2188. The chemical name of 5-Nitro-8-hydroxyquinoline corresponds whith the following drug:
a. Quinocide
b. Ofloxacin
c. Dibazol (Bendazol)
d. Chingamin (Chloroquine)
*e. Nitroxoline
2189. The chemical structure of Strophanthus cardiac glycosides can be characterized by the presence of the following in position 10 of the steroid ring:
a. Alcoholic hydroxyl
b. Phenolic hydroxyl
*c. Aldehyde group
d. Ethoxy group
e. Methoxy group
2190. The chemical structure of Strophanthus cardiac glycosides can be characterized by the presence of the following in position 10 of the steroid ring:
a. Methoxy group
b. Ethoxy group
c. Alcoholic hydroxyl
*d. Aldehyde group
e. Phenolic hydroxyl
2191. The chemical structure of Strophanthus cardiac glycosides can be characterized by the presence of the following in position 10 of the steroid ring:
a. Phenolic hydroxyl
b. Ethoxy group
c. Alcoholic hydroxyl
d. Methoxy group
*e. Aldehyde group
2192. The chief manager of a pharmacy designs its organizational structure and job descriptions for its employees. These arrangements belong to the following management method:
*a. Organizational
b. Economic
c. Legal
d. Psychosocial
e. Simulation
2193. The chief manager of a pharmacy designs its organizational structure and job descriptions for its employees. These arrangements belong to the following management method:
a. Legal
b. Simulation
c. Psychosocial
*d. Organizational
e. Economic
2194. The chief manager of a pharmacy designs its organizational structure and job descriptions for its employees. These arrangements belong to the following management method:
a. Psychosocial
b. Economic
c. Legal
d. Simulation
*e. Organizational
2195. The cholagogue derived from Rosa canina fruit is used in treatment of liver and gallbladder diseases. Name this drug:
*a. Cholosas
b. Allochol
c. Chophytol
d. Altan
e. Phytolyt
2196. The cholagogue derived from Rosa canina fruit is used in treatment of liver and gallbladder diseases. Name this drug:
*a. Cholosas
b. Allochol
c. Phytolyt
d. Altan
e. Chophytol
2197. The cholagogue derived from Rosa canina fruit is used in treatment of liver and gallbladder diseases. Name this drug:
a. Altan
*b. Cholosas
c. Phytolyt
d. Chophytol
e. Allochol
2198. The director of a pharmaceutical company is engaged in strategic planning. What is the final stage of this process?
a. Choosing a strategy
b. Evaluation and analysis of the external environment
*c. Strategy evaluation
d. Formulation of the mission
e. Implementation of the strategic plan
2199. The director of a pharmaceutical company is engaged in strategic planning. What is the final stage of this process?
a. Choosing a strategy
b. Formulation of the mission
c. Implementation of the strategic plan
*d. Strategy evaluation
e. Evaluation and analysis of the external environment
2200. The director of a pharmaceutical company is engaged in strategic planning. What is the final stage of this process?
a. Evaluation and analysis of the external environment
b. Choosing a strategy
*c. Strategy evaluation
d. Formulation of the mission
e. Implementation of the strategic plan
2201. The dispensing chemist of a pharmacy has prepared 5 formulations. Which one of them requires total chemical control?
*a. Atropine sulfate eyedrops
b. Streptocide (sulfanilamide) ointment
c. Baby powder
d. Riboflavin-containing powders
e. Kvater's mixture
2202. The dispensing chemist of a pharmacy has prepared 5 formulations. Which one of them requires total chemical control?
a. Kvater's mixture
*b. Atropine sulfate eyedrops
c. Streptocide (sulfanilamide) ointment
d. Riboflavin-containing powders
e. Baby powder
2203. The doctor has discontinued captopril for a 58-year-old patient diagnosed with arterial hypertension, because the patient has developed a complication. What side effect is the most likely cause for the discontinuation of this drug?
*a. Cough
b. Tinnitus
c. Nausea
d. Abdominal pain
e. Vomiting
2204. The doctor has discontinued captopril for a 58-year-old patient diagnosed with arterial hypertension, because the patient has developed a complication. What side effect is the most likely cause for the discontinuation of this drug?
a. Vomiting
*b. Cough
c. Abdominal pain
d. Tinnitus
e. Nausea
2205. The doctor has discontinued captopril for a 58-year-old patient diagnosed with arterial hypertension, because the patient has developed a complication. What side effect is the most likely cause for the discontinuation of this drug?
a. Vomiting
b. Tinnitus
*c. Cough
d. Nausea
e. Abdominal pain
2206. The doctor has prescribed the patient an antispasmodic agent bendazol hydrochloride (Dibazol). Based on its chemical structure, bendazol hydrochloride is a derivative of:
*a. Benzimidazole
b. Purine
c. Phenothiazine
d. Indole
e. Acridine
2207. The doctor has prescribed the patient an antispasmodic agent bendazol hydrochloride (Dibazol). Based on its chemical structure, bendazol hydrochloride is a derivative of:
a. Phenothiazine
*b. Benzimidazole
c. Acridine
d. Indole
e. Purine
2208. The doctor has prescribed the patient an antispasmodic agent bendazol hydrochloride (Dibazol). Based on its chemical structure, bendazol hydrochloride is a derivative of:
a. Phenothiazine
*b. Benzimidazole
c. Purine
d. Acridine
e. Indole
2209. The doctor prescribed a patient 100 ml of thermopsis grass infusion. How much of the dry concentrate of thermopsis grass (1:1) should the pharmacist measure out for this patient?
a. 0.1 g
b. 0.2 g
c. 0.5 g
*d. 0.25 g
e. 0.3 g
2210. The doctor prescribed a patient 100 ml of thermopsis grass infusion. How much of the dry concentrate of thermopsis grass (1:1) should the pharmacist measure out for this patient?
a. 0.2 g
b. 0.3 g
c. 0.5 g
*d. 0.25 g
e. 0.1 g
2211. The doctor prescribed a patient 100 ml of thermopsis grass infusion. How much of the dry concentrate of thermopsis grass (1:1) should the pharmacist measure out for this patient?
a. 0.5 g
b. 0.2 g
*c. 0.25 g
d. 0.3 g
e. 0.1 g
2212. The documents of a pharmaceutical company are being received and sent in a centralized manner; the documents are stored, drawn-up, registered, and assembled into cases both in the Office Desk of the company and the company's divisions. Specify this type of records management system:
*a. Mixed
b. Referent
c. -
d. Centralized
e. Decentralized
2213. The documents of a pharmaceutical company are being received and sent in a centralized manner; the documents are stored, drawn-up, registered, and assembled into cases both in the Office Desk of the company and the company's divisions. Specify this type of records management system:
a. -
b. Referent
c. Decentralized
d. Centralized
*e. Mixed
2214. The documents of a pharmaceutical company are being received and sent in a centralized manner; the documents are stored, drawn-up, registered, and assembled into cases both in the Office Desk of the company and the company's divisions. Specify this type of records management system:
a. Centralized
b. Referent
*c. Mixed
d. Decentralized
e. -
2215. The drug sanguiritrin contains a combination of alkaloid bisulfates - sanguinarine and chelerythrine - that have an antimicrobial effect against Gram-positive bacteria and exhibit an antitrichomonal effect. What plant is the source of these alkaloids?
*a. Macleaya cordata
b. Vinca minor
c. Chelidonium majus
d. Glaucium flavum
e. Passiflora incarnata
2216. The drug sanguiritrin contains a combination of alkaloid bisulfates - sanguinarine and chelerythrine - that have an antimicrobial effect against Gram-positive bacteria and exhibit an antitrichomonal effect. What plant is the source of these alkaloids?
a. Chelidonium majus
*b. Macleaya cordata
c. Vinca minor
d. Glaucium flavum
e. Passiflora incarnata
2217. The drug sanguiritrin contains a combination of alkaloid bisulfates - sanguinarine and chelerythrine - that have an antimicrobial effect against Gram-positive bacteria and exhibit an antitrichomonal effect. What plant is the source of these alkaloids?
a. Passiflora incarnata
*b. Macleaya cordata
c. Vinca minor
d. Glaucium flavum
e. Chelidonium majus
2218. The duration of a maternity leave for pregnancy and childbirth is calculated in total. What is the total number of calendar days allocated for a maternity leave?
*a. 126 days
b. 115 days
c. 100 days
d. 70 days
e. 50 days
2219. The duration of a maternity leave for pregnancy and childbirth is calculated in total. What is the total number of calendar days allocated for a maternity leave?
a. 100 days
*b. 126 days
c. 50 days
d. 115 days
e. 70 days
2220. The duration of a maternity leave for pregnancy and childbirth is calculated in total. What is the total number of calendar days allocated for a maternity leave?
a. 100 days
b. 70 days
c. 50 days
*d. 126 days
e. 115 days
2221. The duty of a cash desk operator is to perform cash receipt and withdrawal transactions on the grounds of the relevant cash orders. Select from the list below a receipt transaction.
*a. Receipt of funds for advance salary payments
b. Issuing a cash sum to be accounted for
c. Salary payments
d. Payment for the goods purchased for the business needs
e. Withdrawing sales proceeds for the transfer to the current account
2222. The duty of a cash desk operator is to perform cash receipt and withdrawal transactions on the grounds of the relevant cash orders. Select from the list below a receipt transaction.
a. Payment for the goods purchased for the business needs
*b. Receipt of funds for advance salary payments
c. Withdrawing sales proceeds for the transfer to the current account
d. Salary payments
e. Issuing a cash sum to be accounted for
2223. The duty of a cash desk operator is to perform cash receipt and withdrawal transactions on the grounds of the relevant cash orders. Select from the list below a receipt transaction.
a. Withdrawing sales proceeds for the transfer to the current account
b. Issuing a cash sum to be accounted for
c. Payment for the goods purchased for the business needs
d. Salary payments
*e. Receipt of funds for advance salary payments
2224. The eesential oil of which plant contains zamazali, which is formed during steam distillation from matricin?
a. Arniсa  montana
b. Inula  helenium
c. Valeriana offiсinalis
d. Melissa offiсinalis
*e. Сhamomila reсutita
2225. The eesential oil of which plant contains zamazali, which is formed during steam distillation from matricin?
a. Inula  helenium
b. Valeriana offiсinalis
c. Arniсa  montana
d. Melissa offiсinalis
*e. Сhamomila reсutita
2226. The eesential oil of which plant contains zamazali, which is formed during steam distillation from matricin?
a. Valeriana offiсinalis
b. Arniсa  montana
*c. Сhamomila reсutita
d. Melissa offiсinalis
e. Inula  helenium
2227. The extemporaneous compounding department of a pharmacy prepares eye drops. Which one of the listed substances is a preservative?
a. Acetate buffer
*b. Benzalkonium chloride
c. Sodium chloride
d. Polyvinyl alcohol
e. Methyl cellulose
2228. The extemporaneous compounding department of a pharmacy prepares eye drops. Which one of the listed substances is a preservative?
a. Methyl cellulose
b. Acetate buffer
*c. Benzalkonium chloride
d. Polyvinyl alcohol
e. Sodium chloride
2229. The extemporaneous compounding department of a pharmacy prepares eye drops. Which one of the listed substances is a preservative?
a. Sodium chloride
b. Polyvinyl alcohol
*c. Benzalkonium chloride
d. Methyl cellulose
e. Acetate buffer
2230. The extraction process consists of several stages. What is the final stage of the extraction process?
a. Maceration
b. Washing the herbal raw material with an extractant
c. Dissolution
d. Extraction of primary juice
*e. Mass transfer
2231. The extraction process consists of several stages. What is the final stage of the extraction process?
a. Washing the herbal raw material with an extractant
b. Dissolution
c. Maceration
*d. Mass transfer
e. Extraction of primary juice
2232. The extraction process consists of several stages. What is the final stage of the extraction process?
a. Washing the herbal raw material with an extractant
b. Maceration
c. Extraction of primary juice
d. Dissolution
*e. Mass transfer
2233. The following herbal raw material is a source of tannin in pharmaceutical manufacture:
a. Fructus Viburni
*b. Folium Cotini coggygriae
c. Rhizomata Bistortae
d. Rhizomata Bergeniae
e. Rhizomata et radix Sanguisorbae
2234. The following herbal raw material is a source of tannin in pharmaceutical manufacture:
a. Rhizomata Bistortae
*b. Folium Cotini coggygriae
c. Rhizomata Bergeniae
d. Fructus Viburni
e. Rhizomata et radix Sanguisorbae
2235. The following herbal raw material is a source of tannin in pharmaceutical manufacture:
a. Rhizomata et radix Sanguisorbae
b. Fructus Viburni
c. Rhizomata Bistortae
d. Rhizomata Bergeniae
*e. Folium Cotini coggygriae
2236. The following substance is used as an extractant in production of liquid extracts:
*a. Ethanol
b. Chloroform
c. Glycerine
d. Dichloroethane
e. Acetone
2237. The following substance is used as an extractant in production of liquid extracts:
a. Acetone
*b. Ethanol
c. Glycerine
d. Dichloroethane
e. Chloroform
2238. The following substance is used as an extractant in production of liquid extracts:
a. Chloroform
b. Acetone
c. Dichloroethane
*d. Ethanol
e. Glycerine
2239. The head manager of Pharmacy №5 that belongs to the <<Hippocrates>> company was transferred to be the head manager of Pharmacy №1 within the same network. What type of human resources movement is it?
*a. Horizontal rotation
b. Vertical rotation
c. Diagonal rotation
d. Employee turnover
e. Mixed rotation
2240. The head manager of Pharmacy №5 that belongs to the <<Hippocrates>> company was transferred to be the head manager of Pharmacy №1 within the same network. What type of human resources movement is it?
a. Employee turnover
*b. Horizontal rotation
c. Vertical rotation
d. Mixed rotation
e. Diagonal rotation
2241. The head manager of Pharmacy №5 that belongs to the <<Hippocrates>> company was transferred to be the head manager of Pharmacy №1 within the same network. What type of human resources movement is it?
a. Employee turnover
b. Mixed rotation
*c. Horizontal rotation
d. Diagonal rotation
e. Vertical rotation
2242. The head manager of a pharmacy calls the manager of a pharmaceutical wholesaler to clarify the terms of supply. What type of communication is it?
*a. External
b. Vertical
c. Horizontal
d. Internal
e. Interlevel
2243. The head manager of a pharmacy calls the manager of a pharmaceutical wholesaler to clarify the terms of supply. What type of communication is it?
a. Horizontal
b. Interlevel
*c. External
d. Vertical
e. Internal
2244. The head manager of a pharmacy calls the manager of a pharmaceutical wholesaler to clarify the terms of supply. What type of communication is it?
a. Interlevel
*b. External
c. Internal
d. Vertical
e. Horizontal
2245. The head manager of a pharmacy has decided to apply various management methods as a means of influencing separate employees and the staff as a whole. What management methods can be classified as psychosocial?
a. -
b. The process of distribution of duties between the technical level managers
c. The process of salary calculation for the sales department employees
*d. Plan for improvement of the working conditions at the pharmaceutical facility
e. Material stimuli that include salary rates, extra pay, increments, bonuses, etc.
2246. The head manager of a pharmacy has decided to apply various management methods as a means of influencing separate employees and the staff as a whole. What management methods can be classified as psychosocial?
a. Material stimuli that include salary rates, extra pay, increments, bonuses, etc.
b. -
c. The process of distribution of duties between the technical level managers
*d. Plan for improvement of the working conditions at the pharmaceutical facility
e. The process of salary calculation for the sales department employees
2247. The head manager of a pharmacy has decided to apply various management methods as a means of influencing separate employees and the staff as a whole. What management methods can be classified as psychosocial?
a. The process of salary calculation for the sales department employees
b. Material stimuli that include salary rates, extra pay, increments, bonuses, etc.
c. The process of distribution of duties between the technical level managers
d. -
*e. Plan for improvement of the working conditions at the pharmaceutical facility
2248. The head manager of a pharmacy has determined the salary of a dispensing chemist for the work performed according to the labor norms. What type of payment is it?
a. Incentive pay
*b. Base salary
c. Reimbursement
d. Additional salary
e. Pension benefit
2249. The head manager of a pharmacy has determined the salary of a dispensing chemist for the work performed according to the labor norms. What type of payment is it?
a. Incentive pay
b. Pension benefit
c. Reimbursement
d. Additional salary
*e. Base salary
2250. The head manager of a pharmacy has determined the salary of a dispensing chemist for the work performed according to the labor norms. What type of payment is it?
a. Reimbursement
*b. Base salary
c. Pension benefit
d. Incentive pay
e. Additional salary
2251. The head manager of a pharmacy has transferred to the deputy head manager the authority to select the range of products for sale and make decisions about the nomenclature and amount of medicines and medical products to be purchased from suppliers and the terms of such purchase contracts. What is this action called in the management theory?
a. Motivation
b. Planning
*c. Delegation
d. Control
e. Organization
2252. The head manager of a pharmacy has transferred to the deputy head manager the authority to select the range of products for sale and make decisions about the nomenclature and amount of medicines and medical products to be purchased from suppliers and the terms of such purchase contracts. What is this action called in the management theory?
a. Planning
*b. Delegation
c. Organization
d. Motivation
e. Control
2253. The head manager of a pharmacy has transferred to the deputy head manager the authority to select the range of products for sale and make decisions about the nomenclature and amount of medicines and medical products to be purchased from suppliers and the terms of such purchase contracts. What is this action called in the management theory?
a. Planning
b. Control
c. Motivation
*d. Delegation
e. Organization
2254. The head manager of a pharmacy uses influence methods that concern property and financial interests of the employees. What management methods are used by the head manager?
*a. Economic
b. Administrative
c. Technological
d. Social and political
e. Social and psychological
2255. The head manager of a pharmacy uses influence methods that concern property and financial interests of the employees. What management methods are used by the head manager?
a. Administrative
*b. Economic
c. Social and political
d. Technological
e. Social and psychological
2256. The head manager of a pharmacy uses influence methods that concern property and financial interests of the employees. What management methods are used by the head manager?
a. Administrative
b. Technological
*c. Economic
d. Social and psychological
e. Social and political
2257. The head manager of a pharmacy, together with the heads of its departments, decided to expand the selection of products on sale at this pharmacy by expanding the range of products for diabetic nutrition. What type of managerial decision is it?
*a. Collegial
b. Personal
c. -
d. Individual
e. Received from a higher-level organization
2258. The head manager of a pharmacy, together with the heads of its departments, decided to expand the selection of products on sale at this pharmacy by expanding the range of products for diabetic nutrition. What type of managerial decision is it?
a. Individual
b. Received from a higher-level organization
c. Personal
*d. Collegial
e. -
2259. The head manager of a pharmacy, together with the heads of its departments, decided to expand the selection of products on sale at this pharmacy by expanding the range of products for diabetic nutrition. What type of managerial decision is it?
a. Received from a higher-level organization
b. Personal
c. -
*d. Collegial
e. Individual
2260. The head manager of the ''Ecopharm'' pharmacy has entrusted the deputy head manager with some of his duties. The process when an executive partially transfers the authority to perform certain tasks to his or her subordinates is called:
*a. Delegation of authority
b. Dissolution of authority
c. Reduction of authority
d. -
e. Withdrawal of authority
2261. The head manager of the ''Ecopharm'' pharmacy has entrusted the deputy head manager with some of his duties. The process when an executive partially transfers the authority to perform certain tasks to his or her subordinates is called:
a. -
*b. Delegation of authority
c. Reduction of authority
d. Withdrawal of authority
e. Dissolution of authority
2262. The head manager of the ''Ecopharm'' pharmacy has entrusted the deputy head manager with some of his duties. The process when an executive partially transfers the authority to perform certain tasks to his or her subordinates is called:
a. -
b. Dissolution of authority
c. Reduction of authority
d. Withdrawal of authority
*e. Delegation of authority
2263. The head managers of the pharmacy's over-the-counter department and ready-to-use drugs department exchange information on the demand for medicines. What type of communication is it?
*a. Horizontal
b. Vertical descending
c. External
d. Interlevel
e. Vertical ascending
2264. The head managers of the pharmacy's over-the-counter department and ready-to-use drugs department exchange information on the demand for medicines. What type of communication is it?
a. External
b. Interlevel
*c. Horizontal
d. Vertical descending
e. Vertical ascending
2265. The head managers of the pharmacy's over-the-counter department and ready-to-use drugs department exchange information on the demand for medicines. What type of communication is it?
a. Vertical descending
b. Interlevel
*c. Horizontal
d. Vertical ascending
e. External
2266. The head of a pharmacy uses a flexible system of pharmacy management methods. Select from the list below a measure that corresponds with organizational influence methods:
*a. Clear distribution of tasks between the employees
b. Promotion
c. -
d. Meeting the cultural and social needs of employees
e. Material reward (bonuses, increments, pay rise)
2267. The head of a pharmacy uses a flexible system of pharmacy management methods. Select from the list below a measure that corresponds with organizational influence methods:
a. Material reward (bonuses, increments, pay rise)
b. Meeting the cultural and social needs of employees
c. Promotion
d. -
*e. Clear distribution of tasks between the employees
2268. The head of a pharmacy uses a flexible system of pharmacy management methods. Select from the list below a measure that corresponds with organizational influence methods:
a. Meeting the cultural and social needs of employees
b. Promotion
*c. Clear distribution of tasks between the employees
d. -
e. Material reward (bonuses, increments, pay rise)
2269. The herbal raw material of a foxglove is a source, from which cardiotonic agents are obtained. What organs of the Digitalis purpurea are harvested as a herbal raw material?
*a. Leaves
b. Fruits
c. Seeds
d. Roots
e. Rhizomes
2270. The herbal raw material of a foxglove is a source, from which cardiotonic agents are obtained. What organs of the Digitalis purpurea are harvested as a herbal raw material?
a. Rhizomes
b. Fruits
c. Roots
d. Seeds
*e. Leaves
2271. The herbal raw material of a foxglove is a source, from which cardiotonic agents are obtained. What organs of the Digitalis purpurea are harvested as a herbal raw material?
a. Rhizomes
b. Seeds
*c. Leaves
d. Roots
e. Fruits
2272. The introduction of fluorine atoms into a glucocorticosteroid molecule results in a significant increase of the anti-inflammatory effect. What drug is a fluorine-derivative glucocorticoid?
*a. Betamethasone dipropionate
b. Cortisone acetate
c. Prednisone
d. Prednisolone
e. Hydrocortisone acetate
2273. The introduction of fluorine atoms into a glucocorticosteroid molecule results in a significant increase of the anti-inflammatory effect. What drug is a fluorine-derivative glucocorticoid?
a. Cortisone acetate
b. Hydrocortisone acetate
c. Prednisolone
d. Prednisone
*e. Betamethasone dipropionate
2274. The introduction of fluorine atoms into a glucocorticosteroid molecule results in a significant increase of the anti-inflammatory effect. What drug is a fluorine-derivative glucocorticoid?
a. Prednisolone
b. Cortisone acetate
*c. Betamethasone dipropionate
d. Hydrocortisone acetate
e. Prednisone
2275. The main active substances of Rhizomata et radices Eleutherococci are eleutherosides of various chemical nature. What class of bioactive substances includes syringoresinol and its derivatives that determine the tonic and adaptogenic properties of this herbal raw material?
*a. Lignans
b. Xanthones
c. Flavonoids
d. Iridoids
e. Coumarins
2276. The main active substances of Rhizomata et radices Eleutherococci are eleutherosides of various chemical nature. What class of bioactive substances includes syringoresinol and its derivatives that determine the tonic and adaptogenic properties of this herbal raw material?
a. Coumarins
b. Iridoids
*c. Lignans
d. Xanthones
e. Flavonoids
2277. The main active substances of Rhizomata et radices Eleutherococci are eleutherosides of various chemical nature. What class of bioactive substances includes syringoresinol and its derivatives that determine the tonic and adaptogenic properties of this herbal raw material?
a. Xanthones
b. Flavonoids
c. Coumarins
*d. Lignans
e. Iridoids
2278. The main method of quantitative determination of corticosteroids is:
*a. Spectrophotometry
b. Acidimetry
c. Cerimetry
d. Argentometry
e. Potentiometry
2279. The main method of quantitative determination of corticosteroids is:
*a. Spectrophotometry
b. Acidimetry
c. Cerimetry
d. Potentiometry
e. Argentometry
2280. The main method of quantitative determination of corticosteroids is:
a. Potentiometry
b. Argentometry
c. Acidimetry
d. Cerimetry
*e. Spectrophotometry
2281. The management of a pharmaceutical company performs an internal audit to check the compliance with proper work practices. What management function is used by the company's management in this case?
*a. Control
b. Motivation
c. Planning
d. Regulation
e. Organization
2282. The management of a pharmaceutical company performs an internal audit to check the compliance with proper work practices. What management function is used by the company's management in this case?
a. Motivation
b. Regulation
*c. Control
d. Planning
e. Organization
2283. The management of a pharmaceutical company performs an internal audit to check the compliance with proper work practices. What management function is used by the company's management in this case?
a. Organization
*b. Control
c. Planning
d. Regulation
e. Motivation
2284. The management of a pharmaceutical company takes into account the presence of informal groups within the organization. What is characteristic of informal groups?
*a. Resist changes in the organization
b. Have a clear formal structure
c. Are formed for the implementation of the manufacturing process
d. -
e. Are formed upon the request of the head of the organization
2285. The management of a pharmaceutical company takes into account the presence of informal groups within the organization. What is characteristic of informal groups?
a. -
*b. Resist changes in the organization
c. Are formed upon the request of the head of the organization
d. Are formed for the implementation of the manufacturing process
e. Have a clear formal structure
2286. The management of a pharmaceutical company takes into account the presence of informal groups within the organization. What is characteristic of informal groups?
a. Have a clear formal structure
*b. Resist changes in the organization
c. Are formed for the implementation of the manufacturing process
d. Are formed upon the request of the head of the organization
e. -
2287. The management of a pharmaceutical company uses F. Herzberg's two-factor theory of motivation. What is this theory based on?
*a. Hygienic and motivational factors
b. The need for power, success, and affiliation
c. The need for existence, connection, growth
d. The need for protection
e. The need for safety
2288. The management of a pharmaceutical company uses F. Herzberg's two-factor theory of motivation. What is this theory based on?
a. The need for power, success, and affiliation
b. The need for safety
*c. Hygienic and motivational factors
d. The need for protection
e. The need for existence, connection, growth
2289. The management of a pharmaceutical company uses F. Herzberg's two-factor theory of motivation. What is this theory based on?
a. The need for protection
b. The need for safety
*c. Hygienic and motivational factors
d. The need for existence, connection, growth
e. The need for power, success, and affiliation
2290. The management plans to open a new pharmacy in one of the local villages. Such activity can be identified as:
a. Horizontal diversification
*b. Growth strategy
c. Conglomerate diversification
d. Horizontal integration
e. Vertical integration
2291. The management plans to open a new pharmacy in one of the local villages. Such activity can be identified as:
a. Horizontal diversification
b. Conglomerate diversification
c. Horizontal integration
*d. Growth strategy
e. Vertical integration
2292. The management plans to open a new pharmacy in one of the local villages. Such activity can be identified as:
a. Horizontal integration
b. Vertical integration
c. Horizontal diversification
d. Conglomerate diversification
*e. Growth strategy
2293. The manager of a pharmacy chain has drawn up a document, in which he asks a pharmaceutical factory to provide him with the information about the assortment of ointments manufactured by this factory. What document was drawn up by the manager?
*a. Request
b. Offer
c. Complaint
d. Contract
e. Statement
2294. The manager of a pharmacy chain has drawn up a document, in which he asks a pharmaceutical factory to provide him with the information about the assortment of ointments manufactured by this factory. What document was drawn up by the manager?
a. Complaint
b. Contract
c. Offer
d. Statement
*e. Request
2295. The manager of a pharmacy chain has drawn up a document, in which he asks a pharmaceutical factory to provide him with the information about the assortment of ointments manufactured by this factory. What document was drawn up by the manager?
a. Complaint
b. Contract
c. Statement
d. Offer
*e. Request
2296. The market can be characterized by the following conditions: there are many sellers and buyers, who have no influence over current prices; similar and interchangeable competing goods are available; there are no price limits. What type of market is it?
a. Economic planning
*b. Pure competition
c. Oligopoly
d. Monopolistic competition
e. Pure monopoly
2297. The market can be characterized by the following conditions: there are many sellers and buyers, who have no influence over current prices; similar and interchangeable competing goods are available; there are no price limits. What type of market is it?
a. Oligopoly
b. Economic planning
c. Pure monopoly
d. Monopolistic competition
*e. Pure competition
2298. The market can be characterized by the following conditions: there are many sellers and buyers, who have no influence over current prices; similar and interchangeable competing goods are available; there are no price limits. What type of market is it?
a. Oligopoly
b. Monopolistic competition
*c. Pure competition
d. Pure monopoly
e. Economic planning
2299. The marketing department of a pharmaceutical company conducts a field research of the pharmaceutical market. What method of information collection belongs to the field research?
a. Analysis of the periodical publications
b. Analysis of the statistical reference books
c. Analysis of the company's statistical reports
*d. Customer survey
e. Analysis of the scientific publications
2300. The marketing department of a pharmaceutical company conducts a field research of the pharmaceutical market. What method of information collection belongs to the field research?
a. Analysis of the scientific publications
b. Analysis of the company's statistical reports
*c. Customer survey
d. Analysis of the periodical publications
e. Analysis of the statistical reference books
2301. The marketing department of a pharmaceutical company conducts a field research of the pharmaceutical market. What method of information collection belongs to the field research?
a. Analysis of the statistical reference books
b. Analysis of the company's statistical reports
c. Analysis of the periodical publications
d. Analysis of the scientific publications
*e. Customer survey
2302. The marketing department of a pharmaceutical factory determined that the demand for the echinacea syrup for kids greatly fluctuates in response to the smallest changes in its price. What type of demand is it?
a. Inelastic demand
*b. Elastic demand
c. Unitary demand
d. Perfectly inelastic demand
e. Universal demand
2303. The marketing department of a pharmaceutical factory determined that the demand for the echinacea syrup for kids greatly fluctuates in response to the smallest changes in its price. What type of demand is it?
a. Inelastic demand
b. Unitary demand
c. Perfectly inelastic demand
d. Universal demand
*e. Elastic demand
2304. The marketing department of a pharmaceutical factory determined that the demand for the echinacea syrup for kids greatly fluctuates in response to the smallest changes in its price. What type of demand is it?
a. Universal demand
b. Unitary demand
c. Inelastic demand
d. Perfectly inelastic demand
*e. Elastic demand
2305. The marketing department of the ''Aphrodite'' company that specializes in production of anti-aging cosmetics has divided the customers into groups, based on their age. What principle of segmentation is the basis for this customer classification?
*a. Demographic
b. Geographical
c. Behavioral
d. Social and economic
e. Psychographic
2306. The marketing department of the ''Aphrodite'' company that specializes in production of anti-aging cosmetics has divided the customers into groups, based on their age. What principle of segmentation is the basis for this customer classification?
a. Geographical
b. Psychographic
c. Social and economic
*d. Demographic
e. Behavioral
2307. The marketing department of the ''Aphrodite'' company that specializes in production of anti-aging cosmetics has divided the customers into groups, based on their age. What principle of segmentation is the basis for this customer classification?
a. Psychographic
b. Behavioral
c. Geographical
*d. Demographic
e. Social and economic
2308. The marketing team of a pharmaceutical company has calculated the coefficient of elasticity of the demand for medical products, which is equal to 1. What type of elasticity of the demand is it?
a. Elastic
*b. Unitary
c. Perfectly inelastic
d. Inelastic
e. Perfectly elastic
2309. The marketing team of a pharmaceutical company has calculated the coefficient of elasticity of the demand for medical products, which is equal to 1. What type of elasticity of the demand is it?
a. Elastic
b. Perfectly inelastic
c. Inelastic
d. Perfectly elastic
*e. Unitary
2310. The marketing team of a pharmaceutical company has calculated the coefficient of elasticity of the demand for medical products, which is equal to 1. What type of elasticity of the demand is it?
a. Perfectly inelastic
b. Perfectly elastic
c. Elastic
*d. Unitary
e. Inelastic
2311. The marketing team of a pharmaceutical company has performed a comparative analysis of internal environment and external conditions. They have analyzed strengths and weaknesses, opportunities and threats. The marketing team has performed:
a. -
b. ABC analysis
*c. SWOT analysis
d. VEN analysis
e. PEST analysis
2312. The marketing team of a pharmaceutical company has performed a comparative analysis of internal environment and external conditions. They have analyzed strengths and weaknesses, opportunities and threats. The marketing team has performed:
a. ABC analysis
b. -
c. VEN analysis
*d. SWOT analysis
e. PEST analysis
2313. The marketing team of a pharmaceutical company has performed a comparative analysis of internal environment and external conditions. They have analyzed strengths and weaknesses, opportunities and threats. The marketing team has performed:
a. VEN analysis
b. PEST analysis
c. ABC analysis
d. -
*e. SWOT analysis
2314. The material accountability of an employee is determined by the written agreement. When does the agreement of employee's material accountability need to be concluded anew?
a. Change of the dispensing chemist
b. Replacement of over 30% of the initial personnel
*c. Change of the head manager or replacement of over 50% of the initial personnel
d. Change of the janitor
e. Change of the chief accountant
2315. The material accountability of an employee is determined by the written agreement. When does the agreement of employee's material accountability need to be concluded anew?
a. Replacement of over 30% of the initial personnel
*b. Change of the head manager or replacement of over 50% of the initial personnel
c. Change of the chief accountant
d. Change of the janitor
e. Change of the dispensing chemist
2316. The material accountability of an employee is determined by the written agreement. When does the agreement of employee's material accountability need to be concluded anew?
a. Replacement of over 30% of the initial personnel
b. Change of the dispensing chemist
*c. Change of the head manager or replacement of over 50% of the initial personnel
d. Change of the janitor
e. Change of the chief accountant
2317. The medicinal plants of the Fabaсeae family contain various groups of bioactive substances. What representative of this family contains flavonoids and is used as an industrial source of rutin?
a. Glycyrrhiza glabra
b. Bidens tripartita
c. Thermopsis alterniflora
*d. Styphnolobium japonicum
e. Ononis arvensis
2318. The medicinal plants of the Fabaсeae family contain various groups of bioactive substances. What representative of this family contains flavonoids and is used as an industrial source of rutin?
a. Glycyrrhiza glabra
b. Thermopsis alterniflora
c. Ononis arvensis
*d. Styphnolobium japonicum
e. Bidens tripartita
2319. The medicinal plants of the Fabaсeae family contain various groups of bioactive substances. What representative of this family contains flavonoids and is used as an industrial source of rutin?
a. Ononis arvensis
b. Bidens tripartita
c. Glycyrrhiza glabra
*d. Styphnolobium japonicum
e. Thermopsis alterniflora
2320. The medicines that contain anthracene derivatives are used as laxatives. What medicinal plant contains this group of bioactive substances?
*a. Frangula alnus
b. Сalendula officinalis
c. Bidens tripartita
d. Eucalyptus globulus
e. Salvia officinalis
2321. The medicines that contain anthracene derivatives are used as laxatives. What medicinal plant contains this group of bioactive substances?
a. Сalendula officinalis
b. Bidens tripartita
*c. Frangula alnus
d. Eucalyptus globulus
e. Salvia officinalis
2322. The medicines that contain anthracene derivatives are used as laxatives. What medicinal plant contains this group of bioactive substances?
a. Сalendula officinalis
b. Bidens tripartita
*c. Frangula alnus
d. Salvia officinalis
e. Eucalyptus globulus
2323. The method of preparing suspensions depends on the properties of the component substances. What substances have hydrophobic properties?
*a. Camphor, menthol
b. Zinc oxide, talcum
c. Boric acid, calcium carbonate
d. Bolus alba (kaolin), bentonite
e. Sodium bicarbonate, sodium sulfate
2324. The method of preparing suspensions depends on the properties of the component substances. What substances have hydrophobic properties?
a. Sodium bicarbonate, sodium sulfate
b. Bolus alba (kaolin), bentonite
c. Boric acid, calcium carbonate
*d. Camphor, menthol
e. Zinc oxide, talcum
2325. The method of preparing suspensions depends on the properties of the component substances. What substances have hydrophobic properties?
a. Zinc oxide, talcum
b. Bolus alba (kaolin), bentonite
*c. Camphor, menthol
d. Sodium bicarbonate, sodium sulfate
e. Boric acid, calcium carbonate
2326. The method of stirring-up (dispersion) is used to make suspensions with a certain substance. Name this substance:
a. Camphor
b. Streptocide (Sulfanilamide)
c. Sulfur
d. Ethazole
*e. Basic bismuth nitrate
2327. The method of stirring-up (dispersion) is used to make suspensions with a certain substance. Name this substance:
a. Streptocide (Sulfanilamide)
b. Ethazole
c. Camphor
*d. Basic bismuth nitrate
e. Sulfur
2328. The method of stirring-up (dispersion) is used to make suspensions with a certain substance. Name this substance:
a. Sulfur
b. Streptocide (Sulfanilamide)
c. Camphor
*d. Basic bismuth nitrate
e. Ethazole
2329. The mother of a child came to a pharmacy to buy an anti-inflammatory medicine that can relieve the muscle pain in her 10-year-old son. What medicine would you recommend her?
*a. Ibuprofen
b. Nimesulide
c. Acetylsalicylic acid
d. Naproxen
e. Diclofenac
2330. The mother of a child came to a pharmacy to buy an anti-inflammatory medicine that can relieve the muscle pain in her 10-year-old son. What medicine would you recommend her?
a. Acetylsalicylic acid
*b. Ibuprofen
c. Diclofenac
d. Naproxen
e. Nimesulide
2331. The mother of a child came to a pharmacy to buy an anti-inflammatory medicine that can relieve the muscle pain in her 10-year-old son. What medicine would you recommend her?
a. Naproxen
b. Diclofenac
*c. Ibuprofen
d. Acetylsalicylic acid
e. Nimesulide
2332. The owner of a pharmacy network unilaterally decides to register its trade mark, based on his feeling that he makes the right choice. What type of managerial decision is it?
*a. Intuitive
b. Collective
c. Collegial
d. Adaptive
e. Rational
2333. The owner of a pharmacy network unilaterally decides to register its trade mark, based on his feeling that he makes the right choice. What type of managerial decision is it?
a. Adaptive
b. Collegial
*c. Intuitive
d. Rational
e. Collective
2334. The owner of a pharmacy network unilaterally decides to register its trade mark, based on his feeling that he makes the right choice. What type of managerial decision is it?
a. Rational
*b. Intuitive
c. Adaptive
d. Collective
e. Collegial
2335. The personal qualities of the head of a pharmaceutical company are attractive to the subordinates who want to emulate their boss in everything. What form of power of the manager is observed in this situation?
a. -
b. Power based on fear
c. Coercive power
d. Legitimate power
*e. Referent power
2336. The personal qualities of the head of a pharmaceutical company are attractive to the subordinates who want to emulate their boss in everything. What form of power of the manager is observed in this situation?
a. Coercive power
*b. Referent power
c. -
d. Legitimate power
e. Power based on fear
2337. The personal qualities of the head of a pharmaceutical company are attractive to the subordinates who want to emulate their boss in everything. What form of power of the manager is observed in this situation?
a. Power based on fear
b. Legitimate power
c. Coercive power
*d. Referent power
e. -
2338. The pharmaceutical company directs all the efforts to the restoration of the range of endangered medicinal plants listed in the Red Book of Ukraine. What type of responsibility does the firm take on?
*a. Social
b. Personal
c. Administrative
d. Legal
e. Criminal
2339. The pharmaceutical company directs all the efforts to the restoration of the range of endangered medicinal plants listed in the Red Book of Ukraine. What type of responsibility does the firm take on?
a. Criminal
*b. Social
c. Administrative
d. Personal
e. Legal
2340. The pharmaceutical company directs all the efforts to the restoration of the range of endangered medicinal plants listed in the Red Book of Ukraine. What type of responsibility does the firm take on?
a. Personal
*b. Social
c. Administrative
d. Legal
e. Criminal
2341. The pharmacological activity of medicines largely depends on their chemical structure. Which of the following drugs is a pyrazole derivative?
a. Metronidazole
b. Piracetam
c. Bendazol
d. Thiamazole
*e. Metamizole sodium
2342. The pharmacological activity of medicines largely depends on their chemical structure. Which of the following drugs is a pyrazole derivative?
a. Piracetam
*b. Metamizole sodium
c. Bendazol
d. Metronidazole
e. Thiamazole
2343. The pharmacological activity of medicines largely depends on their chemical structure. Which of the following drugs is a pyrazole derivative?
a. Thiamazole
*b. Metamizole sodium
c. Metronidazole
d. Bendazol
e. Piracetam
2344. The pharmacy received the goods from the supplier. In the process of acceptence by the authorized person, a discrepancy in the number of medicines was discovered. What document does the authorized person need to issue?
a. Logbook of receipt of goods by group
*b. Act on established discrepancy in quantity and quality
c. Contract of sale
d. Register of medicinal products received by the subject of economic activity
e. Product report
2345. The pharmacy received the goods from the supplier. In the process of acceptence by the authorized person, a discrepancy in the number of medicines was discovered. What document does the authorized person need to issue?
a. Logbook of receipt of goods by group
b. Product report
*c. Act on established discrepancy in quantity and quality
d. Register of medicinal products received by the subject of economic activity
e. Contract of sale
2346. The pharmacy received the goods from the supplier. In the process of acceptence by the authorized person, a discrepancy in the number of medicines was discovered. What document does the authorized person need to issue?
a. Product report
b. Register of medicinal products received by the subject of economic activity
*c. Act on established discrepancy in quantity and quality
d. Logbook of receipt of goods by group
e. Contract of sale
2347. The phytochemical department of a pharmaceutical manufacture produces maximally purified extracts. In the process, specific methods are used for the extract purification. Which description corresponds with the dialysis method?
a. The process of electrolyte action
b. The process of extraction from one liquid using another liquid
*c. The characteristic of biopolymer molecules that does not allow them to pass through semi-permeable membranes
d. The process of heating the extract
e. The process of gas absorption
2348. The phytochemical department of a pharmaceutical manufacture produces maximally purified extracts. In the process, specific methods are used for the extract purification. Which description corresponds with the dialysis method?
a. The process of extraction from one liquid using another liquid
*b. The characteristic of biopolymer molecules that does not allow them to pass through semi-permeable membranes
c. The process of heating the extract
d. The process of electrolyte action
e. The process of gas absorption
2349. The phytochemical department of a pharmaceutical manufacture produces maximally purified extracts. In the process, specific methods are used for the extract purification. Which description corresponds with the dialysis method?
a. The process of heating the extract
b. The process of extraction from one liquid using another liquid
c. The process of gas absorption
*d. The characteristic of biopolymer molecules that does not allow them to pass through semi-permeable membranes
e. The process of electrolyte action
2350. The phytochemical workshop of a factory produces extraction preparations. For what purpose are concentrated extracts used?
*a. For quick preparation of infusions and decoctions in pharmacy practice
b. To be used as ready-made medicines
c. For preparation of dry extracts
d. For preparation of tinctures
e. For preparation of thick extracts
2351. The phytochemical workshop of a factory produces extraction preparations. For what purpose are concentrated extracts used?
a. For preparation of thick extracts
b. To be used as ready-made medicines
c. For preparation of tinctures
*d. For quick preparation of infusions and decoctions in pharmacy practice
e. For preparation of dry extracts
2352. The phytochemical workshop of a factory produces extraction preparations. For what purpose are concentrated extracts used?
a. To be used as ready-made medicines
b. For preparation of dry extracts
c. For preparation of thick extracts
*d. For quick preparation of infusions and decoctions in pharmacy practice
e. For preparation of tinctures
2353. The phytochemical workshop of a factory produces liquid extracts. What extractants are used in this manufacturing process?
*a. Aqueous-alcoholic solutions
b. Ammonia solution
c. Dichloroethane
d. Chloroform
e. Water
2354. The phytochemical workshop of a factory produces liquid extracts. What extractants are used in this manufacturing process?
a. Ammonia solution
b. Dichloroethane
c. Water
*d. Aqueous-alcoholic solutions
e. Chloroform
2355. The phytochemical workshop of a factory produces liquid extracts. What extractants are used in this manufacturing process?
a. Dichloroethane
b. Chloroform
c. Ammonia solution
*d. Aqueous-alcoholic solutions
e. Water
2356. The preparations of Silybum marianum, ''Silibor'' and ''Carsil'', have hepatoprotective action. What parts of Silybum marianum are the herbal raw material from which these medicines are being made?
*a. Seeds
b. Leaves
c. Roots
d. Grass
e. Flowers
2357. The preparations of Silybum marianum, ''Silibor'' and ''Carsil'', have hepatoprotective action. What parts of Silybum marianum are the herbal raw material from which these medicines are being made?
a. Leaves
b. Roots
*c. Seeds
d. Flowers
e. Grass
2358. The preparations of Silybum marianum, ''Silibor'' and ''Carsil'', have hepatoprotective action. What parts of Silybum marianum are the herbal raw material from which these medicines are being made?
a. Roots
*b. Seeds
c. Grass
d. Flowers
e. Leaves
2359. The presence of a primary aromatic amino group in sulfanilamide structure can be confirmed with a reaction that produces:
a. Fluorescein
b. Diazonium salts
c. Murexide
d. Iodoform
*e. Azo dye
2360. The presence of a primary aromatic amino group in sulfanilamide structure can be confirmed with a reaction that produces:
a. Fluorescein
b. Iodoform
c. Diazonium salts
*d. Azo dye
e. Murexide
2361. The presence of a primary aromatic amino group in sulfanilamide structure can be confirmed with a reaction that produces:
a. Murexide
b. Diazonium salts
c. Fluorescein
d. Iodoform
*e. Azo dye
2362. The price of a medicine depends on many factors. Which of the listed below is an internal factor of price formation for a pharmaceutical manufacturer?
a. Customer preferences
b. Demand for the product
*c. Manufacturing costs
d. Middleman markup
e. Pricing policy of the competitors
2363. The price of a medicine depends on many factors. Which of the listed below is an internal factor of price formation for a pharmaceutical manufacturer?
a. Customer preferences
b. Pricing policy of the competitors
*c. Manufacturing costs
d. Demand for the product
e. Middleman markup
2364. The price of a medicine depends on many factors. Which of the listed below is an internal factor of price formation for a pharmaceutical manufacturer?
a. Middleman markup
b. Demand for the product
c. Customer preferences
d. Pricing policy of the competitors
*e. Manufacturing costs
2365. The procedure for circulation of narcotic drugs, psychotropic substances, and precursors in pharmacies is regulated by law. Which one of the medicines listed below is a narcotic drug?
a. Atropine sulfate
b. Ethyl alcohol
c. Prednisolone
d. Zopiclone
*e. Tramadol
2366. The procedure for circulation of narcotic drugs, psychotropic substances, and precursors in pharmacies is regulated by law. Which one of the medicines listed below is a narcotic drug?
a. Ethyl alcohol
b. Atropine sulfate
c. Prednisolone
*d. Tramadol
e. Zopiclone
2367. The procedure for circulation of narcotic drugs, psychotropic substances, and precursors in pharmacies is regulated by law. Which one of the medicines listed below is a narcotic drug?
a. Prednisolone
b. Zopiclone
c. Ethyl alcohol
d. Atropine sulfate
*e. Tramadol
2368. The process of rectification is used to make ethyl alcohol. This process is based on the following principle:
*a. Separation of the mixture consisting of mutually-associating liquids with different boiling temperature into separate fractions
b. Technology of obtaining liquid extracts
c. Deep vacuum distillation
d. Rinsing of exhausted raw material with 3-5 times the amount of ethanol
e. Distillation with inert gases
2369. The process of rectification is used to make ethyl alcohol. This process is based on the following principle:
a. Deep vacuum distillation
b. Distillation with inert gases
*c. Separation of the mixture consisting of mutually-associating liquids with different boiling temperature into separate fractions
d. Technology of obtaining liquid extracts
e. Rinsing of exhausted raw material with 3-5 times the amount of ethanol
2370. The process of rectification is used to make ethyl alcohol. This process is based on the following principle:
a. Technology of obtaining liquid extracts
*b. Separation of the mixture consisting of mutually-associating liquids with different boiling temperature into separate fractions
c. Deep vacuum distillation
d. Rinsing of exhausted raw material with 3-5 times the amount of ethanol
e. Distillation with inert gases
2371. The quality control analytical laboratory analyzes a medicine with sodium benzoate. What reagent will form a pink-yellow precipitate with the medicine being analyzed?
*a. Iron(III) chloride solution
b. Potassium permanganate solution
c. Magnesium sulfate solution
d. Sodium bicarbonate solution
e. Sodium nitrate solution
2372. The quality control analytical laboratory analyzes a medicine with sodium benzoate. What reagent will form a pink-yellow precipitate with the medicine being analyzed?
a. Magnesium sulfate solution
b. Sodium bicarbonate solution
c. Sodium nitrate solution
*d. Iron(III) chloride solution
e. Potassium permanganate solution
2373. The quality control analytical laboratory analyzes a medicine with sodium benzoate. What reagent will form a pink-yellow precipitate with the medicine being analyzed?
a. Potassium permanganate solution
b. Sodium nitrate solution
*c. Iron(III) chloride solution
d. Magnesium sulfate solution
e. Sodium bicarbonate solution
2374. The quantification of acetylsalicylic acid using the method of direct alkalimetry is recommended to be carried out at the temperature no higher than 20°С to prevent a certain process form occurring. What process is it?
a. Oxidation of the medicinal substance
b. Decarboxylation of the medicinal substance
c. Precipitation of the formed salt
d. Reduction of the medicinal substance
*e. Hydrolysis of the ester group
2375. The quantification of acetylsalicylic acid using the method of direct alkalimetry is recommended to be carried out at the temperature no higher than 20°С to prevent a certain process form occurring. What process is it?
a. Precipitation of the formed salt
b. Oxidation of the medicinal substance
*c. Hydrolysis of the ester group
d. Decarboxylation of the medicinal substance
e. Reduction of the medicinal substance
2376. The quantification of acetylsalicylic acid using the method of direct alkalimetry is recommended to be carried out at the temperature no higher than 20°С to prevent a certain process form occurring. What process is it?
a. Reduction of the medicinal substance
b. Oxidation of the medicinal substance
c. Decarboxylation of the medicinal substance
*d. Hydrolysis of the ester group
e. Precipitation of the formed salt
2377. The reaction of glucose identification produces red precipitate with the following reagent:
*a. Copper-tartrate
b. Ammoniacal silver nitrate solution
c. Alkaline potassium tetraiodomercurate solution
d. Thiocyanogen bromide
e. Sodium nitroprusside solution
2378. The reaction of glucose identification produces red precipitate with the following reagent:
a. Alkaline potassium tetraiodomercurate solution
*b. Copper-tartrate
c. Thiocyanogen bromide
d. Sodium nitroprusside solution
e. Ammoniacal silver nitrate solution
2379. The reaction of glucose identification produces red precipitate with the following reagent:
a. Alkaline potassium tetraiodomercurate solution
b. Sodium nitroprusside solution
c. Ammoniacal silver nitrate solution
d. Thiocyanogen bromide
*e. Copper-tartrate
2380. The solubility of high-molecular compounds depends on their nature. Specify a high-molecular compound that can swell up indefinitely:
a. Methylcellulose
*b. Pepsin
c. Starch
d. Gelatin
e. Pectin
2381. The solubility of high-molecular compounds depends on their nature. Specify a high-molecular compound that can swell up indefinitely:
a. Methylcellulose
b. Gelatin
*c. Pepsin
d. Starch
e. Pectin
2382. The solubility of high-molecular compounds depends on their nature. Specify a high-molecular compound that can swell up indefinitely:
a. Methylcellulose
b. Starch
*c. Pepsin
d. Pectin
e. Gelatin
2383. The substances and their salts that are used in production and purification of narcotic and psychotropic substances should be accounted in the pharmacy as:
*a. Precursors
b. Narcotic substances
c. Potent substances
d. Toxic substances
e. Psychotropic substances
2384. The substances and their salts that are used in production and purification of narcotic and psychotropic substances should be accounted in the pharmacy as:
*a. Precursors
b. Toxic substances
c. Psychotropic substances
d. Potent substances
e. Narcotic substances
2385. The substances and their salts that are used in production and purification of narcotic and psychotropic substances should be accounted in the pharmacy as:
a. Psychotropic substances
b. Potent substances
c. Narcotic substances
*d. Precursors
e. Toxic substances
2386. The tablet workshop at a pharmaceutical factory manufactures tablets adding adjuvants into the tablet mass. What substances belong to taste correctors?
a. Purified water, starch glue, sugar syrup, gelatin, carboxymethylcellulose solution
b. Starch, glucose, kaolinite, magnesium oxide, sodium bicarbonate
c. Methylcellulose, polyvinylpyrrolidone, acetylphthalylcellulose
d. Stearic acid, calcium and magnesium stearate, starch, talcum
*e. Sugar, glucose, essential oils, menthol, fruit juice concentrates, indigo carmine, iron oxide, mannitol
2387. The tablet workshop at a pharmaceutical factory manufactures tablets adding adjuvants into the tablet mass. What substances belong to taste correctors?
a. Stearic acid, calcium and magnesium stearate, starch, talcum
b. Methylcellulose, polyvinylpyrrolidone, acetylphthalylcellulose
c. Starch, glucose, kaolinite, magnesium oxide, sodium bicarbonate
d. Purified water, starch glue, sugar syrup, gelatin, carboxymethylcellulose solution
*e. Sugar, glucose, essential oils, menthol, fruit juice concentrates, indigo carmine, iron oxide, mannitol
2388. The tablet workshop at a pharmaceutical factory manufactures tablets adding adjuvants into the tablet mass. What substances belong to taste correctors?
a. Stearic acid, calcium and magnesium stearate, starch, talcum
b. Purified water, starch glue, sugar syrup, gelatin, carboxymethylcellulose solution
c. Methylcellulose, polyvinylpyrrolidone, acetylphthalylcellulose
*d. Sugar, glucose, essential oils, menthol, fruit juice concentrates, indigo carmine, iron oxide, mannitol
e. Starch, glucose, kaolinite, magnesium oxide, sodium bicarbonate
2389. The tableting department of a pharmaceutival company begins to produce ''fizzy'' vitamin tablets.  Name the groups of gas-producing leavening agents:
a. Citric acid and aerosil (fumed silica)
b. Tartaric acid and magnesium stearate
c. Ascorbic acid and aerosil (fumed silica)
d. Citric acid and magnesium stearate
*e. Tartaric acid and sodium bicarbonate
2390. The tableting department of a pharmaceutival company begins to produce ''fizzy'' vitamin tablets.  Name the groups of gas-producing leavening agents:
a. Tartaric acid and magnesium stearate
b. Citric acid and aerosil (fumed silica)
*c. Tartaric acid and sodium bicarbonate
d. Citric acid and magnesium stearate
e. Ascorbic acid and aerosil (fumed silica)
2391. The tableting department of a pharmaceutival company begins to produce ''fizzy'' vitamin tablets.  Name the groups of gas-producing leavening agents:
a. Tartaric acid and magnesium stearate
b. Citric acid and aerosil (fumed silica)
c. Ascorbic acid and aerosil (fumed silica)
*d. Tartaric acid and sodium bicarbonate
e. Citric acid and magnesium stearate
2392. The thyme grass is used for the production of herbal medical products for the treatment of respiratory tract infections. Under the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine the herbal raw material is subject to chromatographic identification by means of thin layer chromatography. What substances are detected on the chromatographic plate after its treatment with due reagent?
a. Apigenin and luteolin
b. Quercetin and rutin
c. Atropine and hyoscyamine
d. Arbutin and methyl arbutin
*e. Thymol and carvacrol
2393. The thyme grass is used for the production of herbal medical products for the treatment of respiratory tract infections. Under the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine the herbal raw material is subject to chromatographic identification by means of thin layer chromatography. What substances are detected on the chromatographic plate after its treatment with due reagent?
a. Arbutin and methyl arbutin
b. Apigenin and luteolin
*c. Thymol and carvacrol
d. Atropine and hyoscyamine
e. Quercetin and rutin
2394. The thyme grass is used for the production of herbal medical products for the treatment of respiratory tract infections. Under the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine the herbal raw material is subject to chromatographic identification by means of thin layer chromatography. What substances are detected on the chromatographic plate after its treatment with due reagent?
a. Atropine and hyoscyamine
*b. Thymol and carvacrol
c. Quercetin and rutin
d. Apigenin and luteolin
e. Arbutin and methyl arbutin
2395. The total turnover of goods at a pharmacy consists of retail and wholesale turnover. What belongs to the wholesale turnover?
*a. Dispensing extemporaneous medicines manufactured by a pharmacy according to the inpatient prescriptions
b. Dispensing medical products to outpatients
c. Dispensing medicines according to outpatient prescriptions
d. Dispensing over-the-counter medicines to the people
e. Dispensing prescription medicines to the people
2396. The total turnover of goods at a pharmacy consists of retail and wholesale turnover. What belongs to the wholesale turnover?
*a. Dispensing extemporaneous medicines manufactured by a pharmacy according to the inpatient prescriptions
b. Dispensing prescription medicines to the people
c. Dispensing over-the-counter medicines to the people
d. Dispensing medicines according to outpatient prescriptions
e. Dispensing medical products to outpatients
2397. The total turnover of goods at a pharmacy consists of retail and wholesale turnover. What belongs to the wholesale turnover?
a. Dispensing over-the-counter medicines to the people
*b. Dispensing extemporaneous medicines manufactured by a pharmacy according to the inpatient prescriptions
c. Dispensing medicines according to outpatient prescriptions
d. Dispensing prescription medicines to the people
e. Dispensing medical products to outpatients
2398. There are certain legal requirements to the format of a prescription. Physicians that have a private practice must state the following in the upper left corner of a prescription form:
a. Medical facility seal
b. License number
*c. Own address, license number and its date of issue
d. Surname and initials of the doctor
e. Own address
2399. There are certain legal requirements to the format of a prescription. Physicians that have a private practice must state the following in the upper left corner of a prescription form:
a. Surname and initials of the doctor
*b. Own address, license number and its date of issue
c. Medical facility seal
d. License number
e. Own address
2400. There are different grades and types of glass based on their quality, quantitative composition, and properties. What type of glass belongs to the first-grade?
a. MTB (colorless glass for medical containers)
*b. USP-1
c. NS-2 A (neutral glass 2A)
d. NS-2 (neutral glass 2)
e. AB-1 (non-boric glass)
2401. There are different grades and types of glass based on their quality, quantitative composition, and properties. What type of glass belongs to the first-grade?
a. MTB (colorless glass for medical containers)
b. AB-1 (non-boric glass)
*c. USP-1
d. NS-2 A (neutral glass 2A)
e. NS-2 (neutral glass 2)
2402. There are different grades and types of glass based on their quality, quantitative composition, and properties. What type of glass belongs to the first-grade?
a. NS-2 (neutral glass 2)
*b. USP-1
c. AB-1 (non-boric glass)
d. NS-2 A (neutral glass 2A)
e. MTB (colorless glass for medical containers)
2403. There are several formal and informal groups among the pharmaceutical company's employees. What feature is characteristic of formal groups?
a. The group leader receives authority from the group
*b. They are created to implement the production process
c. They form spontaneously
d. They form as a result of interest, sympathy
e. They resist changes in the organization
2404. There are several formal and informal groups among the pharmaceutical company's employees. What feature is characteristic of formal groups?
a. The group leader receives authority from the group
b. They resist changes in the organization
*c. They are created to implement the production process
d. They form as a result of interest, sympathy
e. They form spontaneously
2405. There are several formal and informal groups among the pharmaceutical company's employees. What feature is characteristic of formal groups?
a. They resist changes in the organization
*b. They are created to implement the production process
c. The group leader receives authority from the group
d. They form as a result of interest, sympathy
e. They form spontaneously
2406. There are several indirect taxes in the Ukrainian taxation system. What indirect tax is paid by the consumer as a surcharge to the value of goods?
*a. Excise tax
b. Commercial patent
c. Single tax
d. Income tax
e. Individual income tax
2407. There are several indirect taxes in the Ukrainian taxation system. What indirect tax is paid by the consumer as a surcharge to the value of goods?
a. Commercial patent
b. Single tax
*c. Excise tax
d. Income tax
e. Individual income tax
2408. There are several indirect taxes in the Ukrainian taxation system. What indirect tax is paid by the consumer as a surcharge to the value of goods?
a. Individual income tax
b. Income tax
c. Single tax
d. Commercial patent
*e. Excise tax
2409. There are six types of intra-pharmacy control. Which of them requires determination of total mass or volume of a dosage form, as well as the number of doses and the mass of each dose?
a. Chemical control
b. Survey control
*c. Physical control
d. Organoleptic control
e. Written control
2410. There are six types of intra-pharmacy control. Which of them requires determination of total mass or volume of a dosage form, as well as the number of doses and the mass of each dose?
a. Chemical control
b. Survey control
c. Organoleptic control
*d. Physical control
e. Written control
2411. There are six types of intra-pharmacy control. Which of them requires determination of total mass or volume of a dosage form, as well as the number of doses and the mass of each dose?
a. Written control
b. Survey control
*c. Physical control
d. Chemical control
e. Organoleptic control
2412. There are various groups of adjuvants used in tablet production. What is the function of excipients?
*a. To make pills of a certain weight
b. To create necessary adhesive force between particles
c. To improve the taste
d. To improve the flowability of granular material
e. To improve disintegration
2413. There are various groups of adjuvants used in tablet production. What is the function of excipients?
a. To improve disintegration
b. To improve the taste
c. To create necessary adhesive force between particles
*d. To make pills of a certain weight
e. To improve the flowability of granular material
2414. There are various groups of adjuvants used in tablet production. What is the function of excipients?
a. To improve the flowability of granular material
b. To improve the taste
c. To create necessary adhesive force between particles
d. To improve disintegration
*e. To make pills of a certain weight
2415. Throughout the year, three employees voluntarily resigned from a pharmaceutical company. What type of employee movement is it?
*a. Staff turnover
b. Vertical job rotation
c. Horizontal job rotation
d. -
e. Recruiting
2416. Throughout the year, three employees voluntarily resigned from a pharmaceutical company. What type of employee movement is it?
*a. Staff turnover
b. Vertical job rotation
c. Recruiting
d. -
e. Horizontal job rotation
2417. Throughout the year, three employees voluntarily resigned from a pharmaceutical company. What type of employee movement is it?
a. Vertical job rotation
*b. Staff turnover
c. Recruiting
d. Horizontal job rotation
e. -
2418. Thymol and carvacrol are the main active substances of Thymus vulgaris. They belong to the following class of bioactive substances:
a. Anthracene derivatives
b. Alkaloids
*c. Essential oils
d. Iridoids
e. Flavonoids
2419. Thymol and carvacrol are the main active substances of Thymus vulgaris. They belong to the following class of bioactive substances:
a. Flavonoids
b. Iridoids
*c. Essential oils
d. Anthracene derivatives
e. Alkaloids
2420. Thymol and carvacrol are the main active substances of Thymus vulgaris. They belong to the following class of bioactive substances:
a. Iridoids
b. Flavonoids
c. Anthracene derivatives
*d. Essential oils
e. Alkaloids
2421. Thymus serpyllum grass is harvested in Ukraine. At what stage of plant growth is this herbal raw material harvested?
a. After harvesting the fruits
b. Before the flowering
c. When the fruits are ripe
d. Before the formation of green fruits
*e. During the flowering stage
2422. Thymus serpyllum grass is harvested in Ukraine. At what stage of plant growth is this herbal raw material harvested?
a. Before the flowering
*b. During the flowering stage
c. After harvesting the fruits
d. When the fruits are ripe
e. Before the formation of green fruits
2423. Thymus serpyllum grass is harvested in Ukraine. At what stage of plant growth is this herbal raw material harvested?
a. Before the flowering
*b. During the flowering stage
c. Before the formation of green fruits
d. When the fruits are ripe
e. After harvesting the fruits
2424. To check the authenticity of Helichrysum arenarium flowers, magnesium powder and concentrated HCl were added to the extract obtained from the herbal raw material. What class of compounds is indicated in this case, if this reaction produces a red coloring?
*a. Flavonoids
b. Polysaccharides
c. Vitamins
d. Tannins
e. Alkaloids
2425. To check the authenticity of Helichrysum arenarium flowers, magnesium powder and concentrated HCl were added to the extract obtained from the herbal raw material. What class of compounds is indicated in this case, if this reaction produces a red coloring?
a. Alkaloids
b. Tannins
c. Vitamins
*d. Flavonoids
e. Polysaccharides
2426. To check the authenticity of Helichrysum arenarium flowers, magnesium powder and concentrated HCl were added to the extract obtained from the herbal raw material. What class of compounds is indicated in this case, if this reaction produces a red coloring?
a. Tannins
b. Vitamins
c. Polysaccharides
*d. Flavonoids
e. Alkaloids
2427. To check the identity of a herbal raw material, several drops of an alcoholic solution of alpha-naphthol and concentrated sulfuric acid were applied to the root section of Сiсhorium intybus L.. It resulted in pink-violet coloring that indicates the presence of the following in the herbal raw material:
a. Essential oils
*b. Inulin
c. Fatty oils
d. Slime
e. Pectin
2428. To check the identity of a herbal raw material, several drops of an alcoholic solution of alpha-naphthol and concentrated sulfuric acid were applied to the root section of Сiсhorium intybus L.. It resulted in pink-violet coloring that indicates the presence of the following in the herbal raw material:
a. Essential oils
b. Fatty oils
c. Slime
*d. Inulin
e. Pectin
2429. To check the identity of a herbal raw material, several drops of an alcoholic solution of alpha-naphthol and concentrated sulfuric acid were applied to the root section of Сiсhorium intybus L.. It resulted in pink-violet coloring that indicates the presence of the following in the herbal raw material:
a. Slime
*b. Inulin
c. Pectin
d. Fatty oils
e. Essential oils
2430. To confirm the presence of sulfat ions in the medicinal preparation of magnesium sulfate an analytical chemist of a pharmacy uses the following solutions:
*a. Barium chloride and hydrochloric acid
b. Ammonium chloride and ammonium hydrate
c. Silver nitrate and nitric acid
d. Diphenylamine
e. Benzenesulfonic acid
2431. To confirm the presence of sulfat ions in the medicinal preparation of magnesium sulfate an analytical chemist of a pharmacy uses the following solutions:
a. Silver nitrate and nitric acid
*b. Barium chloride and hydrochloric acid
c. Ammonium chloride and ammonium hydrate
d. Benzenesulfonic acid
e. Diphenylamine
2432. To confirm the presence of sulfat ions in the medicinal preparation of magnesium sulfate an analytical chemist of a pharmacy uses the following solutions:
a. Silver nitrate and nitric acid
b. Benzenesulfonic acid
c. Diphenylamine
*d. Barium chloride and hydrochloric acid
e. Ammonium chloride and ammonium hydrate
2433. To decrease business risks, a pharmaceutical company decided to expand its activity and penetrate into new market (to open a fitness center). Name this process:
*a. Diversification
b. Modernization
c. Conglomeration
d. Intensification
e. Integration
2434. To decrease business risks, a pharmaceutical company decided to expand its activity and penetrate into new market (to open a fitness center). Name this process:
a. Intensification
*b. Diversification
c. Modernization
d. Integration
e. Conglomeration
2435. To determine the quantity of wild-growing medicinal plants, it is necessary to know their area of vegetation and yield per unit area. Yield of Thymus serpyllum grass can be determined by the following method:
*a. Projective cover method
b. Geodesically
c. Permanent quadrate method
d. Visually
e. Model sample method
2436. To determine the quantity of wild-growing medicinal plants, it is necessary to know their area of vegetation and yield per unit area. Yield of Thymus serpyllum grass can be determined by the following method:
a. Geodesically
b. Permanent quadrate method
c. Visually
*d. Projective cover method
e. Model sample method
2437. To determine the quantity of wild-growing medicinal plants, it is necessary to know their area of vegetation and yield per unit area. Yield of Thymus serpyllum grass can be determined by the following method:
a. Permanent quadrate method
b. Model sample method
c. Visually
*d. Projective cover method
e. Geodesically
2438. To ensure the quality of medicines the pharmacy devotes much attention to quality control. The following document is the quality assurance of a drug:
a. Certificate of compliance with hygiene regulations
b. Sanitary-epidemiological certificate
c. Sanitary passport
*d. Quality certificate
e. Registration certificate
2439. To ensure the quality of medicines the pharmacy devotes much attention to quality control. The following document is the quality assurance of a drug:
a. Registration certificate
b. Sanitary-epidemiological certificate
c. Certificate of compliance with hygiene regulations
*d. Quality certificate
e. Sanitary passport
2440. To ensure the quality of medicines the pharmacy devotes much attention to quality control. The following document is the quality assurance of a drug:
a. Sanitary passport
*b. Quality certificate
c. Registration certificate
d. Sanitary-epidemiological certificate
e. Certificate of compliance with hygiene regulations
2441. To identify a drug, an analytical chemist of the State Inspectorate for Drug Quality Control performs a reaction with ninhydrin solution. Specify the drug being identified:
*a. Methionine
b. Ascorbic acid
c. Cortisone acetate
d. Streptocide
e. Paracetamol
2442. To identify a drug, an analytical chemist of the State Inspectorate for Drug Quality Control performs a reaction with ninhydrin solution. Specify the drug being identified:
a. Ascorbic acid
b. Cortisone acetate
c. Paracetamol
d. Streptocide
*e. Methionine
2443. To identify a drug, an analytical chemist of the State Inspectorate for Drug Quality Control performs a reaction with ninhydrin solution. Specify the drug being identified:
a. Cortisone acetate
b. Streptocide
c. Paracetamol
d. Ascorbic acid
*e. Methionine
2444. To identify a drug, an analytical chemist used the reaction of azo dye formation. What drug was being analyzed in this case?
*a. Procaine hydrochloride
b. Clonidine hydrochloride
c. Papaverine hydrochloride
d. Pilocarpine hydrochloride
e. Morphine hydrochloride
2445. To identify a drug, an analytical chemist used the reaction of azo dye formation. What drug was being analyzed in this case?
a. Clonidine hydrochloride
b. Papaverine hydrochloride
c. Pilocarpine hydrochloride
d. Morphine hydrochloride
*e. Procaine hydrochloride
2446. To identify a drug, an analytical chemist used the reaction of azo dye formation. What drug was being analyzed in this case?
a. Morphine hydrochloride
b. Clonidine hydrochloride
c. Pilocarpine hydrochloride
*d. Procaine hydrochloride
e. Papaverine hydrochloride
2447. To identify a medicinal substance, an analytical chemist performed a reaction of azo dye formation. This reaction is characteristic of the following medicine:
a. Chlorpropamide
b. Phenyl salicylate
*c. Benzocaine
d. Resorcinol
e. Acetylsalicylic acid
2448. To identify a medicinal substance, an analytical chemist performed a reaction of azo dye formation. This reaction is characteristic of the following medicine:
a. Phenyl salicylate
*b. Benzocaine
c. Acetylsalicylic acid
d. Chlorpropamide
e. Resorcinol
2449. To identify a medicinal substance, an analytical chemist performed a reaction of azo dye formation. This reaction is characteristic of the following medicine:
a. Phenyl salicylate
b. Resorcinol
*c. Benzocaine
d. Chlorpropamide
e. Acetylsalicylic acid
2450. To identify a substance, an analytical chemist performs a reaction with the cyanogen bromide reagent and aniline. What substance is being analyzed in this case?
*a. Nicotinic acid
b. Salicylic acid
c. Ascorbic acid
d. Benzoic acid
e. Citric acid
2451. To identify a substance, an analytical chemist performs a reaction with the cyanogen bromide reagent and aniline. What substance is being analyzed in this case?
a. Benzoic acid
b. Salicylic acid
c. Ascorbic acid
d. Citric acid
*e. Nicotinic acid
2452. To identify a substance, an analytical chemist performs a reaction with the cyanogen bromide reagent and aniline. What substance is being analyzed in this case?
a. Citric acid
b. Ascorbic acid
c. Benzoic acid
*d. Nicotinic acid
e. Salicylic acid
2453. To identify acetylsalicylic acid, the substance is subjected to alkaline hydrolysis. After acidification of the reaction mixture, acetic acid is formed, which can be detected using the reaction with ethanol in the presence of concentrated sulfuric acid. What reaction product causes the characteristic odor in this case?
*a. Ethyl acetate
b. Benzaldehyde
c. Sulfur dioxide
d. Ammonia
e. Pyridine
2454. To identify acetylsalicylic acid, the substance is subjected to alkaline hydrolysis. After acidification of the reaction mixture, acetic acid is formed, which can be detected using the reaction with ethanol in the presence of concentrated sulfuric acid. What reaction product causes the characteristic odor in this case?
a. Benzaldehyde
b. Ammonia
*c. Ethyl acetate
d. Sulfur dioxide
e. Pyridine
2455. To identify acetylsalicylic acid, the substance is subjected to alkaline hydrolysis. After acidification of the reaction mixture, acetic acid is formed, which can be detected using the reaction with ethanol in the presence of concentrated sulfuric acid. What reaction product causes the characteristic odor in this case?
a. Sulfur dioxide
b. Ammonia
c. Pyridine
*d. Ethyl acetate
e. Benzaldehyde
2456. To identify an alkaloid drug, an analytical chemist used the reaction that produces purple-red murexide. What substance can be identified using this reaction?
*a. Caffeine
b. Codeine
c. Papaverine
d. Atropine
e. Morphine
2457. To identify an alkaloid drug, an analytical chemist used the reaction that produces purple-red murexide. What substance can be identified using this reaction?
a. Atropine
b. Codeine
c. Papaverine
*d. Caffeine
e. Morphine
2458. To identify an alkaloid drug, an analytical chemist used the reaction that produces purple-red murexide. What substance can be identified using this reaction?
a. Papaverine
b. Codeine
*c. Caffeine
d. Morphine
e. Atropine
2459. To identify cardiac glycosides there are usually three groups of color reactions being performed: for steroid nucleus, for lactonic ring, and for carbohydrate component. Specify the reaction for identification of butenolide ring:
*a. Legal's test
b. Dragendorff's test
c. Reaction of sublimation
d. Mayer's test
e. Stahl's reaction
2460. To identify cardiac glycosides there are usually three groups of color reactions being performed: for steroid nucleus, for lactonic ring, and for carbohydrate component. Specify the reaction for identification of butenolide ring:
a. Mayer's test
b. Reaction of sublimation
c. Dragendorff's test
*d. Legal's test
e. Stahl's reaction
2461. To identify cardiac glycosides there are usually three groups of color reactions being performed: for steroid nucleus, for lactonic ring, and for carbohydrate component. Specify the reaction for identification of butenolide ring:
a. Stahl's reaction
b. Reaction of sublimation
c. Dragendorff's test
*d. Legal's test
e. Mayer's test
2462. To identify ethanol an analytical chemist needs to conduct a:
a. Ninhydrin test
b. Hydroxamate test
*c. Iodoform test
d. Thalleioquin test
e. Murexide test
2463. To identify ethanol an analytical chemist needs to conduct a:
a. Ninhydrin test
b. Murexide test
c. Thalleioquin test
d. Hydroxamate test
*e. Iodoform test
2464. To identify ethanol an analytical chemist needs to conduct a:
a. Thalleioquin test
b. Ninhydrin test
*c. Iodoform test
d. Hydroxamate test
e. Murexide test
2465. To identify pilocarpine hydrochloride it is necessary to use reaction with sodium nitroprusside in an alkaline medium (Legal's test). Resulting cherry-red coloring confirms presence of the following in the pilocarpine structure:
*a. Lactonic ring
b. Methyl group
c. Imidazole ring
d. Chloride ions
e. Methylene group
2466. To identify pilocarpine hydrochloride it is necessary to use reaction with sodium nitroprusside in an alkaline medium (Legal's test). Resulting cherry-red coloring confirms presence of the following in the pilocarpine structure:
a. Imidazole ring
*b. Lactonic ring
c. Methyl group
d. Chloride ions
e. Methylene group
2467. To identify pilocarpine hydrochloride it is necessary to use reaction with sodium nitroprusside in an alkaline medium (Legal's test). Resulting cherry-red coloring confirms presence of the following in the pilocarpine structure:
a. Methyl group
b. Methylene group
c. Chloride ions
*d. Lactonic ring
e. Imidazole ring
2468. To identify vicasol (menadione), an analytical chemist places this substance moistened with hydrochloric acid into a colorless burner flame. The yellow flame coloring that develops as a result indicates the presence of the following cations in the molecule:
a. Potassium
*b. Sodium
c. Magnesium
d. Calcium
e. Zinc
2469. To identify vicasol (menadione), an analytical chemist places this substance moistened with hydrochloric acid into a colorless burner flame. The yellow flame coloring that develops as a result indicates the presence of the following cations in the molecule:
a. Potassium
*b. Sodium
c. Zinc
d. Magnesium
e. Calcium
2470. To identify vicasol (menadione), an analytical chemist places this substance moistened with hydrochloric acid into a colorless burner flame. The yellow flame coloring that develops as a result indicates the presence of the following cations in the molecule:
a. Zinc
b. Calcium
*c. Sodium
d. Potassium
e. Magnesium
2471. To improve iodine solubility in the purified water, iodine must be:
*a. Dissolved in the saturated solution of potassium iodide
b. Comminuted with alcohol
c. Dissolved in the boiling water
d. Dispersed with glycerine
e. Reduced to fine powder
2472. To improve iodine solubility in the purified water, iodine must be:
*a. Dissolved in the saturated solution of potassium iodide
b. Dispersed with glycerine
c. Reduced to fine powder
d. Dissolved in the boiling water
e. Comminuted with alcohol
2473. To improve iodine solubility in the purified water, iodine must be:
a. Dispersed with glycerine
b. Comminuted with alcohol
*c. Dissolved in the saturated solution of potassium iodide
d. Dissolved in the boiling water
e. Reduced to fine powder
2474. To improve structural and mechanical properties of capsule shells, to ensure their proper elasticity and reduce their brittleness, the following substances are introduced into the gelatin mass:
a. Preservatives
*b. Plasticizers
c. Stabilizers
d. Thickeners
e. Pigments
2475. To improve structural and mechanical properties of capsule shells, to ensure their proper elasticity and reduce their brittleness, the following substances are introduced into the gelatin mass:
a. Stabilizers
*b. Plasticizers
c. Thickeners
d. Pigments
e. Preservatives
2476. To improve structural and mechanical properties of capsule shells, to ensure their proper elasticity and reduce their brittleness, the following substances are introduced into the gelatin mass:
a. Thickeners
*b. Plasticizers
c. Stabilizers
d. Preservatives
e. Pigments
2477. To increase its sales, the ''Have a good day!'' pharmacy introduced a discount system. According to this system if a customer buys 100 UAH worth of medical products, this customer receives 2% discount. What marketing communication has this pharmacy implemented?
a. Middlemen-oriented sales promotion
*b. Consumer-oriented sales promotion
c. Personal sale
d. Salesmen-oriented sales promotion
e. Public relations, sponsorship
2478. To increase its sales, the ''Have a good day!'' pharmacy introduced a discount system. According to this system if a customer buys 100 UAH worth of medical products, this customer receives 2% discount. What marketing communication has this pharmacy implemented?
a. Public relations, sponsorship
*b. Consumer-oriented sales promotion
c. Salesmen-oriented sales promotion
d. Personal sale
e. Middlemen-oriented sales promotion
2479. To increase its sales, the ''Have a good day!'' pharmacy introduced a discount system. According to this system if a customer buys 100 UAH worth of medical products, this customer receives 2% discount. What marketing communication has this pharmacy implemented?
a. Salesmen-oriented sales promotion
b. Personal sale
c. Public relations, sponsorship
d. Middlemen-oriented sales promotion
*e. Consumer-oriented sales promotion
2480. To increase the tone and specific rhythmic activity of the uterus, a certain ergot alkaloids-based herbal drug is used. Name this drug:
a. Atropine sulfate
b. Papaverine hydrochloride
c. Codeine phosphate
d. Morphine hydrochloride
*e. Ergotamine hydrotartrate
2481. To increase the tone and specific rhythmic activity of the uterus, a certain ergot alkaloids-based herbal drug is used. Name this drug:
a. Codeine phosphate
b. Morphine hydrochloride
*c. Ergotamine hydrotartrate
d. Atropine sulfate
e. Papaverine hydrochloride
2482. To increase the tone and specific rhythmic activity of the uterus, a certain ergot alkaloids-based herbal drug is used. Name this drug:
a. Codeine phosphate
b. Papaverine hydrochloride
*c. Ergotamine hydrotartrate
d. Morphine hydrochloride
e. Atropine sulfate
2483. To measure out a small amount of liquid, a stactometer is used. How many drops are there in 1 mL of purified water, if we are to use a standard stactometer?
*a. 20
b. 10
c. 30
d. 50
e. 40
2484. To measure out a small amount of liquid, a stactometer is used. How many drops are there in 1 mL of purified water, if we are to use a standard stactometer?
a. 10
b. 50
*c. 20
d. 40
e. 30
2485. To measure out a small amount of liquid, a stactometer is used. How many drops are there in 1 mL of purified water, if we are to use a standard stactometer?
a. 40
*b. 20
c. 50
d. 10
e. 30
2486. To minimize business risks, the board of directors of a pharmaceutical company decides to expand into a market of plant protection products. Such approach to risk management is called:
*a. Diversification
b. Integration
c. Consolidation
d. Insurance
e. Intensification
2487. To minimize business risks, the board of directors of a pharmaceutical company decides to expand into a market of plant protection products. Such approach to risk management is called:
a. Consolidation
b. Integration
*c. Diversification
d. Intensification
e. Insurance
2488. To minimize business risks, the board of directors of a pharmaceutical company decides to expand into a market of plant protection products. Such approach to risk management is called:
a. Insurance
b. Intensification
c. Consolidation
d. Integration
*e. Diversification
2489. To prepare a suspension a medicinal substance should be triturated with a small amount of liquid. Specify the optimal amount of liquid for trituration of 10 g of zinc oxide according to the Deriagin's rule:
a. 10 ml
b. 2 ml
*c. 5 ml
d. 1 ml
e. 0,5 ml
2490. To prepare a suspension a medicinal substance should be triturated with a small amount of liquid. Specify the optimal amount of liquid for trituration of 10 g of zinc oxide according to the Deriagin's rule:
a. 2 ml
b. 1 ml
c. 0,5 ml
*d. 5 ml
e. 10 ml
2491. To prepare a suspension a medicinal substance should be triturated with a small amount of liquid. Specify the optimal amount of liquid for trituration of 10 g of zinc oxide according to the Deriagin's rule:
a. 2 ml
b. 10 ml
c. 1 ml
*d. 5 ml
e. 0,5 ml
2492. To prepare an ointment, a pharmacist has additionally used paraffin. What is the role of paraffin in the technology?
a. Dispersing agent for powders
b. Emulsifier
c. Vehicle
d. Preservative
*e. Densifier
2493. To prepare an ointment, a pharmacist has additionally used paraffin. What is the role of paraffin in the technology?
a. Vehicle
*b. Densifier
c. Dispersing agent for powders
d. Preservative
e. Emulsifier
2494. To prepare an ointment, a pharmacist has additionally used paraffin. What is the role of paraffin in the technology?
a. Vehicle
b. Dispersing agent for powders
*c. Densifier
d. Preservative
e. Emulsifier
2495. To prepare decoctions with the volume of 1000-3000 ml, they should be infused in a boiling water bath for:
a. 15 minutes
b. 25 minutes
c. 45 minutes
d. 30 minutes
*e. 40 minutes
2496. To prepare decoctions with the volume of 1000-3000 ml, they should be infused in a boiling water bath for:
a. 25 minutes
b. 45 minutes
*c. 40 minutes
d. 30 minutes
e. 15 minutes
2497. To prepare decoctions with the volume of 1000-3000 ml, they should be infused in a boiling water bath for:
a. 45 minutes
b. 15 minutes
*c. 40 minutes
d. 25 minutes
e. 30 minutes
2498. To prepare eyedrops with antibiotic a dispensing chemist has been using flowing steam sterilization under 100^oC for 30 minutes. What antibiotic allows for such sterilization?
*a. Levomycetin (Chloramphenicol)
b. Streptomycin sulfate
c. Sodium benzylpenicillin
d. Erythromycin
e. Biomycin
2499. To prepare eyedrops with antibiotic a dispensing chemist has been using flowing steam sterilization under 100^oC for 30 minutes. What antibiotic allows for such sterilization?
a. Sodium benzylpenicillin
b. Streptomycin sulfate
*c. Levomycetin (Chloramphenicol)
d. Biomycin
e. Erythromycin
2500. To prepare eyedrops with antibiotic a dispensing chemist has been using flowing steam sterilization under 100^oC for 30 minutes. What antibiotic allows for such sterilization?
a. Streptomycin sulfate
*b. Levomycetin (Chloramphenicol)
c. Biomycin
d. Erythromycin
e. Sodium benzylpenicillin
2501. To reduce business risks, a pharmaceutical company expands its business by entering new areas and industries that are unrelated to the drug manufacturing. Name this process.
*a. Diversification
b. Intensification
c. Conglomeration
d. Modernization
e. Integration
2502. To reduce business risks, a pharmaceutical company expands its business by entering new areas and industries that are unrelated to the drug manufacturing. Name this process.
a. Integration
*b. Diversification
c. Intensification
d. Modernization
e. Conglomeration
2503. To reduce business risks, a pharmaceutical company expands its business by entering new areas and industries that are unrelated to the drug manufacturing. Name this process.
a. Integration
b. Intensification
*c. Diversification
d. Conglomeration
e. Modernization
2504. To reduce business risks, the director of a pharmaceutical company has decided to withdraw a part of the profits and invest money into the restaurant business. Name the phenomenon, when the effort and capital are divided and invested into different types of business, the results of which are not directly related.
a. Indexation
b. Bankruptcy
*c. Diversification
d. Insurance
e. Liquidation
2505. To reduce business risks, the director of a pharmaceutical company has decided to withdraw a part of the profits and invest money into the restaurant business. Name the phenomenon, when the effort and capital are divided and invested into different types of business, the results of which are not directly related.
a. Indexation
b. Insurance
*c. Diversification
d. Liquidation
e. Bankruptcy
2506. To reduce business risks, the director of a pharmaceutical company has decided to withdraw a part of the profits and invest money into the restaurant business. Name the phenomenon, when the effort and capital are divided and invested into different types of business, the results of which are not directly related.
a. Indexation
b. Insurance
c. Liquidation
d. Bankruptcy
*e. Diversification
2507. To replenish its fixed assets, the pharmacy made a decision to arrange a credit with the trading bank. What document must be concluded in writing between the creditor and the debtor in this case?
*a. Credit contract
b. Balance sheet
c. License
d. Auditor's conclusion
e. Full material liability contract
2508. To replenish its fixed assets, the pharmacy made a decision to arrange a credit with the trading bank. What document must be concluded in writing between the creditor and the debtor in this case?
a. Full material liability contract
*b. Credit contract
c. License
d. Balance sheet
e. Auditor's conclusion
2509. To replenish its fixed assets, the pharmacy made a decision to arrange a credit with the trading bank. What document must be concluded in writing between the creditor and the debtor in this case?
a. License
b. Balance sheet
c. Auditor's conclusion
*d. Credit contract
e. Full material liability contract
2510. To restore the demand for a traditional medicine, the manufacturer has improved its characteristics, increased advertising costs, reduced prices, and involved new intermediaries. What type of marketing is used in this case?
a. -
*b. Remarketing
c. Synchromarketing
d. Conversion marketing
e. Countermarketing
2511. To restore the demand for a traditional medicine, the manufacturer has improved its characteristics, increased advertising costs, reduced prices, and involved new intermediaries. What type of marketing is used in this case?
a. Countermarketing
b. -
c. Synchromarketing
d. Conversion marketing
*e. Remarketing
2512. To restore the demand for a traditional medicine, the manufacturer has improved its characteristics, increased advertising costs, reduced prices, and involved new intermediaries. What type of marketing is used in this case?
a. Countermarketing
b. Synchromarketing
*c. Remarketing
d. -
e. Conversion marketing
2513. To retain full control over its trade operations on the regional market, the ''Fitoprom'' pharmaceutical company conducts its marketing policy without any intermediate parties. Name the marketing practice that excludes the middleman:
*a. Direct
b. Mixed
c. Mediated
d. Indirect
e. Combined
2514. To retain full control over its trade operations on the regional market, the ''Fitoprom'' pharmaceutical company conducts its marketing policy without any intermediate parties. Name the marketing practice that excludes the middleman:
a. Combined
*b. Direct
c. Mediated
d. Indirect
e. Mixed
2515. To retain full control over its trade operations on the regional market, the ''Fitoprom'' pharmaceutical company conducts its marketing policy without any intermediate parties. Name the marketing practice that excludes the middleman:
a. Indirect
*b. Direct
c. Combined
d. Mediated
e. Mixed
2516. To stabilize the suspension a pharmacist has used potassium soap. What substance does this suspension contain?
*a. Sulfur
b. Camphor
c. Menthol
d. Basic bismuth nitrate
e. Phenyl salicylate
2517. To stabilize the suspension a pharmacist has used potassium soap. What substance does this suspension contain?
*a. Sulfur
b. Phenyl salicylate
c. Camphor
d. Menthol
e. Basic bismuth nitrate
2518. To stabilize the suspension a pharmacist has used potassium soap. What substance does this suspension contain?
a. Camphor
b. Menthol
c. Basic bismuth nitrate
*d. Sulfur
e. Phenyl salicylate
2519. To treat iron-deficiency anemia the following drug is usually prescribed:
*a. Ferroplex
b. Vicasol (Menadione)
c. Heparin
d. Furagin (Furazidinum)
e. Corticosteroids
2520. To treat iron-deficiency anemia the following drug is usually prescribed:
a. Corticosteroids
b. Furagin (Furazidinum)
*c. Ferroplex
d. Vicasol (Menadione)
e. Heparin
2521. To treat iron-deficiency anemia the following drug is usually prescribed:
a. Heparin
b. Vicasol (Menadione)
c. Furagin (Furazidinum)
*d. Ferroplex
e. Corticosteroids
2522. To work properly, a pharmacy needs sufficient staff. What job position belongs to the auxiliary staff of a pharmacy?
*a. Packer
b. -
c. Pharmacist
d. Head of a department
e. Accountant
2523. To work properly, a pharmacy needs sufficient staff. What job position belongs to the auxiliary staff of a pharmacy?
a. -
b. Head of a department
c. Accountant
*d. Packer
e. Pharmacist
2524. To work properly, a pharmacy needs sufficient staff. What job position belongs to the auxiliary staff of a pharmacy?
a. -
b. Head of a department
c. Pharmacist
*d. Packer
e. Accountant
2525. Tosylchloramide sodium (chloramine) has a disinfecting effect due to the release of active chlorine in an acidic medium. What method is used to quantify it?
*a. Iodometry
b. Nitritometry
c. Permanganatometry
d. Iodochlorometry
e. Complexonometry
2526. Tosylchloramide sodium (chloramine) has a disinfecting effect due to the release of active chlorine in an acidic medium. What method is used to quantify it?
a. Complexonometry
b. Iodochlorometry
c. Permanganatometry
d. Nitritometry
*e. Iodometry
2527. Tosylchloramide sodium (chloramine) has a disinfecting effect due to the release of active chlorine in an acidic medium. What method is used to quantify it?
a. Nitritometry
b. Permanganatometry
*c. Iodometry
d. Complexonometry
e. Iodochlorometry
2528. Tussilago farfara leaves are a component of drugs that exhibit coating, expectorant, and softening effect. What class of bioactive substances determines such pharmacological characteristics of this raw material?
*a. Polysaccharides
b. Saponins
c. Essential oils
d. Phenolic glycosides
e. Vitamins
2529. Tussilago farfara leaves are a component of drugs that exhibit coating, expectorant, and softening effect. What class of bioactive substances determines such pharmacological characteristics of this raw material?
a. Vitamins
b. Phenolic glycosides
c. Essential oils
d. Saponins
*e. Polysaccharides
2530. Tussilago farfara leaves are a component of drugs that exhibit coating, expectorant, and softening effect. What class of bioactive substances determines such pharmacological characteristics of this raw material?
a. Vitamins
b. Saponins
*c. Polysaccharides
d. Essential oils
e. Phenolic glycosides
2531. Tween-80 is being introduced into an emulsion system. What is the role of Tween-80 in emulsions?
a. Antioxidant
b. Preservative
c. Solvent
d. Taste correction agent
*e. Emulsifier
2532. Tween-80 is being introduced into an emulsion system. What is the role of Tween-80 in emulsions?
a. Preservative
b. Solvent
c. Antioxidant
d. Taste correction agent
*e. Emulsifier
2533. Tween-80 is being introduced into an emulsion system. What is the role of Tween-80 in emulsions?
a. Solvent
b. Preservative
c. Taste correction agent
*d. Emulsifier
e. Antioxidant
2534. Tyndallization is used at a pharmaceutical factory as one of sterilization methods for thermolabile substances. What is the essence of this method?
a. Autoclaving at 119-121^oC with pressure at 1,0-1,1 atm
b. Sterilization with flowing steam at 100^oC
*c. Triple heating of solution to 40-60^oC with 24-hour-long intervals in between for thermostating
d. Sterilization with high-frequency and microwave frequency current
e. Sterilization with dry heat at 180-200^oC for a lengthy period of time
2535. Tyndallization is used at a pharmaceutical factory as one of sterilization methods for thermolabile substances. What is the essence of this method?
a. Autoclaving at 119-121^oC with pressure at 1,0-1,1 atm
b. Sterilization with high-frequency and microwave frequency current
*c. Triple heating of solution to 40-60^oC with 24-hour-long intervals in between for thermostating
d. Sterilization with flowing steam at 100^oC
e. Sterilization with dry heat at 180-200^oC for a lengthy period of time
2536. Tyndallization is used at a pharmaceutical factory as one of sterilization methods for thermolabile substances. What is the essence of this method?
a. Sterilization with flowing steam at 100^oC
*b. Triple heating of solution to 40-60^oC with 24-hour-long intervals in between for thermostating
c. Sterilization with high-frequency and microwave frequency current
d. Sterilization with dry heat at 180-200^oC for a lengthy period of time
e. Autoclaving at 119-121^oC with pressure at 1,0-1,1 atm
2537. Under the current legislation there is a certain list of controlled substances that require keeping of the special inventory log. Select the drug that belongs on this list:
*a. Phenobarbital
b. Analgin (Metamizole)
c. Digoxin
d. Solpadeine
e. Novocaine
2538. Under the current legislation there is a certain list of controlled substances that require keeping of the special inventory log. Select the drug that belongs on this list:
*a. Phenobarbital
b. Analgin (Metamizole)
c. Solpadeine
d. Digoxin
e. Novocaine
2539. Under the current legislation there is a certain list of controlled substances that require keeping of the special inventory log. Select the drug that belongs on this list:
a. Solpadeine
*b. Phenobarbital
c. Digoxin
d. Analgin (Metamizole)
e. Novocaine
2540. Under the current legislation, full or partial exemption of persons and legal entities from tax payment is called:
a. Subject to taxation
b. Tax system
c. Tax rate
*d. Tax concession
e. Tax
2541. Under the current legislation, full or partial exemption of persons and legal entities from tax payment is called:
a. Tax rate
b. Subject to taxation
c. Tax
*d. Tax concession
e. Tax system
2542. Under the current legislation, full or partial exemption of persons and legal entities from tax payment is called:
a. Tax system
b. Subject to taxation
*c. Tax concession
d. Tax rate
e. Tax
2543. Urethral suppositories are being made for a patient. What parameters should be specified by the doctor in the formulation for the pharmacist to be able to calculate the necessary amount of the vehicle correctly?
a. Length and quantity of the supositories
b. Diameter and vehicle of the supositories
c. Diameter and quantity of the supositories
*d. Diameter, length, and quantity of the supositories
e. Quantity and vehicle of the supositories
2544. Urethral suppositories are being made for a patient. What parameters should be specified by the doctor in the formulation for the pharmacist to be able to calculate the necessary amount of the vehicle correctly?
a. Quantity and vehicle of the supositories
*b. Diameter, length, and quantity of the supositories
c. Diameter and quantity of the supositories
d. Diameter and vehicle of the supositories
e. Length and quantity of the supositories
2545. Urethral suppositories are being made for a patient. What parameters should be specified by the doctor in the formulation for the pharmacist to be able to calculate the necessary amount of the vehicle correctly?
a. Quantity and vehicle of the supositories
b. Diameter and vehicle of the supositories
c. Diameter and quantity of the supositories
d. Length and quantity of the supositories
*e. Diameter, length, and quantity of the supositories
2546. Valerian roots and rhizomes are processed in the phytochemistry workshop to produce tinctures and thick extracts that are the components of combined sedatives. Name the group of bioactive compounds that includes valerian valepotriates, - valtrate, acevaltrate, and dihydrovaltrate:
a. Polysaccharides
*b. Iridoids
c. Alkaloids
d. Essential oils
e. Saponins
2547. Valerian roots and rhizomes are processed in the phytochemistry workshop to produce tinctures and thick extracts that are the components of combined sedatives. Name the group of bioactive compounds that includes valerian valepotriates, - valtrate, acevaltrate, and dihydrovaltrate:
a. Saponins
b. Alkaloids
c. Essential oils
*d. Iridoids
e. Polysaccharides
2548. Valerian roots and rhizomes are processed in the phytochemistry workshop to produce tinctures and thick extracts that are the components of combined sedatives. Name the group of bioactive compounds that includes valerian valepotriates, - valtrate, acevaltrate, and dihydrovaltrate:
a. Saponins
b. Polysaccharides
*c. Iridoids
d. Alkaloids
e. Essential oils
2549. Various admixtures are possible in the process of harvesting, drying, and primary processing of herbal raw material. Organic admixtures include:
*a. Non-harvested parts of the same plant
b. Metallic objects
c. Glass fragments
d. Soil particles
e. Sand
2550. Various admixtures are possible in the process of harvesting, drying, and primary processing of herbal raw material. Organic admixtures include:
*a. Non-harvested parts of the same plant
b. Metallic objects
c. Sand
d. Soil particles
e. Glass fragments
2551. Various admixtures are possible in the process of harvesting, drying, and primary processing of herbal raw material. Organic admixtures include:
a. Metallic objects
b. Soil particles
c. Glass fragments
d. Sand
*e. Non-harvested parts of the same plant
2552. Various groups of propellants are used in production of aerosols. What group does carbon dioxide CO_2 belong to?
*a. Compressed gases
b. Liquefied gases
c. Non-volatile gases
d. Rarefied gases
e. Volatile gases
2553. Various groups of propellants are used in production of aerosols. What group does carbon dioxide CO_2 belong to?
*a. Compressed gases
b. Volatile gases
c. Rarefied gases
d. Liquefied gases
e. Non-volatile gases
2554. Various groups of propellants are used in production of aerosols. What group does carbon dioxide CO_2 belong to?
a. Liquefied gases
b. Volatile gases
*c. Compressed gases
d. Non-volatile gases
e. Rarefied gases
2555. Various types of dryers can be used for granule dehumidification. Specify the type of ''СП-30'' dryer:
*a. Fluidized bed dryer
b. Silica gel dryer
c. Infrared dryer
d. Freeze dryer
e. Forced air dryer
2556. Various types of dryers can be used for granule dehumidification. Specify the type of ''СП-30'' dryer:
a. Freeze dryer
b. Silica gel dryer
c. Forced air dryer
d. Infrared dryer
*e. Fluidized bed dryer
2557. Various types of dryers can be used for granule dehumidification. Specify the type of ''СП-30'' dryer:
a. Silica gel dryer
b. Infrared dryer
c. Forced air dryer
*d. Fluidized bed dryer
e. Freeze dryer
2558. Various types of glass are used in production of parenteral drugs. What type of glass is used for photosensitive substances?
*a. Light-resistant neutral glass "СНС-1"
b. Alkaline glass "АБ-1"
c. Neutral glass "НС-2"
d. Borosilicate neutral glass "УСП -1"
e. Neutral glass "НС-2А"
2559. Various types of glass are used in production of parenteral drugs. What type of glass is used for photosensitive substances?
*a. Light-resistant neutral glass "СНС-1"
b. Alkaline glass "АБ-1"
c. Neutral glass "НС-2А"
d. Neutral glass "НС-2"
e. Borosilicate neutral glass "УСП -1"
2560. Various types of glass are used in production of parenteral drugs. What type of glass is used for photosensitive substances?
a. Borosilicate neutral glass "УСП -1"
b. Neutral glass "НС-2А"
*c. Light-resistant neutral glass "СНС-1"
d. Alkaline glass "АБ-1"
e. Neutral glass "НС-2"
2561. Veratrum water is used as an antiparasitic agent and is very toxic, which is why it can be used only externally. What class of bioactive substances causes this effect?
a. Cardiac glycosides
*b. Alkaloids
c. Thioglycosides
d. Fatty oils
e. Steroidal saponins
2562. Veratrum water is used as an antiparasitic agent and is very toxic, which is why it can be used only externally. What class of bioactive substances causes this effect?
a. Steroidal saponins
b. Fatty oils
c. Cardiac glycosides
*d. Alkaloids
e. Thioglycosides
2563. Veratrum water is used as an antiparasitic agent and is very toxic, which is why it can be used only externally. What class of bioactive substances causes this effect?
a. Steroidal saponins
b. Thioglycosides
c. Cardiac glycosides
*d. Alkaloids
e. Fatty oils
2564. Vinblastine and Vincristine demonstrate antitumor activity. Name the herbal raw material used in production of these medicines:
a. Folia Berberidis
b. Herba Selaginis
*c. Folia Catharanthi rosei
d. Herba Vincae minoris
e. Rhizomata Nupharis lutei
2565. Vinblastine and Vincristine demonstrate antitumor activity. Name the herbal raw material used in production of these medicines:
a. Folia Berberidis
b. Herba Vincae minoris
c. Herba Selaginis
*d. Folia Catharanthi rosei
e. Rhizomata Nupharis lutei
2566. Vinblastine and Vincristine demonstrate antitumor activity. Name the herbal raw material used in production of these medicines:
a. Folia Berberidis
b. Rhizomata Nupharis lutei
c. Herba Selaginis
d. Herba Vincae minoris
*e. Folia Catharanthi rosei
2567. Vitali-Morin's reaction is used to identify tropane alkaloids in herbal raw material. Name the alkaloid that can be detected by means of this specific reaction:
*a. Scopolamine
b. Platyphyllin
c. Morphine
d. Papaverine
e. Codeine
2568. Vitali-Morin's reaction is used to identify tropane alkaloids in herbal raw material. Name the alkaloid that can be detected by means of this specific reaction:
a. Papaverine
*b. Scopolamine
c. Platyphyllin
d. Codeine
e. Morphine
2569. Vitali-Morin's reaction is used to identify tropane alkaloids in herbal raw material. Name the alkaloid that can be detected by means of this specific reaction:
a. Platyphyllin
b. Codeine
c. Papaverine
*d. Scopolamine
e. Morphine
2570. Vitamin K is known to take part in formation of prothrombin and to facilitate blood coagulation. What herbal raw material accumulates significant amounts of vitamin K and has a hemostatic effect?
a. Semina Hippocastani
*b. Folia Urticae
c. Folia Fragariaе
d. Folia Menthae piperitae
e. Fructus Hippophaes
2571. Vitamin K is known to take part in formation of prothrombin and to facilitate blood coagulation. What herbal raw material accumulates significant amounts of vitamin K and has a hemostatic effect?
a. Semina Hippocastani
b. Folia Fragariaе
c. Folia Menthae piperitae
*d. Folia Urticae
e. Fructus Hippophaes
2572. Vitamin K is known to take part in formation of prothrombin and to facilitate blood coagulation. What herbal raw material accumulates significant amounts of vitamin K and has a hemostatic effect?
a. Semina Hippocastani
b. Fructus Hippophaes
c. Folia Fragariaе
d. Folia Menthae piperitae
*e. Folia Urticae
2573. Weibel's liquid is necessary to stabilize the solution of a certain substance. Name this substance:
*a. Glucose
b. Novocaine
c. Potassium chloride
d. Magnesium sulfate
e. Sodium chloride
2574. Weibel's liquid is necessary to stabilize the solution of a certain substance. Name this substance:
a. Magnesium sulfate
*b. Glucose
c. Sodium chloride
d. Potassium chloride
e. Novocaine
2575. Weibel's liquid is necessary to stabilize the solution of a certain substance. Name this substance:
a. Sodium chloride
b. Magnesium sulfate
c. Potassium chloride
d. Novocaine
*e. Glucose
2576. What activity of a pharmaceutical company includes improvement of employees' working and living conditions, healthcare and medical insurance and other means of social development?
*a. Social responsibility
b. Industrial activity
c. Charity
d. Financial activity
e. Commercial activity
2577. What activity of a pharmaceutical company includes improvement of employees' working and living conditions, healthcare and medical insurance and other means of social development?
a. Financial activity
*b. Social responsibility
c. Charity
d. Commercial activity
e. Industrial activity
2578. What activity of a pharmaceutical company includes improvement of employees' working and living conditions, healthcare and medical insurance and other means of social development?
a. Financial activity
*b. Social responsibility
c. Charity
d. Industrial activity
e. Commercial activity
2579. What adjuvants are added to a tablet mass to promote its breakup?
*a. Disintegrants
b. Fillers
c. Thickeners
d. Lubricants
e. Antioxidants
2580. What adjuvants are added to a tablet mass to promote its breakup?
*a. Disintegrants
b. Lubricants
c. Fillers
d. Antioxidants
e. Thickeners
2581. What adjuvants are added to a tablet mass to promote its breakup?
*a. Disintegrants
b. Lubricants
c. Thickeners
d. Fillers
e. Antioxidants
2582. What adjuvants are used in manufacturing of tablets to change their taste?
*a. Corrigents
b. Thickeners
c. Fillers
d. Antioxidants
e. Leavening agents
2583. What adjuvants are used in manufacturing of tablets to change their taste?
a. Fillers
b. Antioxidants
c. Leavening agents
d. Thickeners
*e. Corrigents
2584. What adjuvants are used in manufacturing of tablets to change their taste?
a. Thickeners
b. Leavening agents
c. Fillers
d. Antioxidants
*e. Corrigents
2585. What adjuvants can increase the viscosity and melting temperature of an ointment base?
*a. Paraffin, spermaceti
b. Benzalkonium chloride
c. Ethanol, purified water
d. Propylene glycol, gelatin
e. Sodium lauryl sulfate
2586. What adjuvants can increase the viscosity and melting temperature of an ointment base?
*a. Paraffin, spermaceti
b. Sodium lauryl sulfate
c. Ethanol, purified water
d. Benzalkonium chloride
e. Propylene glycol, gelatin
2587. What adjuvants can increase the viscosity and melting temperature of an ointment base?
a. Propylene glycol, gelatin
b. Sodium lauryl sulfate
c. Benzalkonium chloride
*d. Paraffin, spermaceti
e. Ethanol, purified water
2588. What adjuvants improve the wettability and water permeability of the components during the tablet production?
a. Antifriction materials
*b. Leaveners
c. Solvents
d. Film formers
e. Thickeners
2589. What adjuvants improve the wettability and water permeability of the components during the tablet production?
a. Film formers
b. Solvents
*c. Leaveners
d. Antifriction materials
e. Thickeners
2590. What adjuvants improve the wettability and water permeability of the components during the tablet production?
a. Solvents
*b. Leaveners
c. Thickeners
d. Antifriction materials
e. Film formers
2591. What amount of the standard pharmacopoeial fluid of aluminum acetate must be taken to prepare 100 mL of 10% Burov's solution?
*a. 10 mL
b. 3 mL
c. 6.25 mL
d. 12.5 mL
e. 7.5 mL
2592. What amount of the standard pharmacopoeial fluid of aluminum acetate must be taken to prepare 100 mL of 10% Burov's solution?
a. 3 mL
b. 6.25 mL
c. 7.5 mL
d. 12.5 mL
*e. 10 mL
2593. What amount of the standard pharmacopoeial fluid of aluminum acetate must be taken to prepare 100 mL of 10% Burov's solution?
a. 3 mL
b. 7.5 mL
c. 6.25 mL
d. 12.5 mL
*e. 10 mL
2594. What amount of the standard pharmacopoeial formaldehyde solution must be taken to prepare 100 mL of a 20% formalin solution?
a. 10 mL
b. 54 mL
*c. 20 mL
d. 30 mL
e. 5 mL
2595. What amount of the standard pharmacopoeial formaldehyde solution must be taken to prepare 100 mL of a 20% formalin solution?
a. 30 mL
b. 10 mL
c. 54 mL
*d. 20 mL
e. 5 mL
2596. What amount of the standard pharmacopoeial formaldehyde solution must be taken to prepare 100 mL of a 20% formalin solution?
a. 30 mL
b. 5 mL
*c. 20 mL
d. 10 mL
e. 54 mL
2597. What amount of toxic substance and vehicle is contained in 10.0 of trituration (1:10)?
a. 0.01 and 9.99
b. 0.1 and 9.9
*c. 1.0 and 9.0
d. 0.05 and 9.95
e. 0.5 and 9.5
2598. What amount of toxic substance and vehicle is contained in 10.0 of trituration (1:10)?
a. 0.05 and 9.95
b. 0.5 and 9.5
*c. 1.0 and 9.0
d. 0.1 and 9.9
e. 0.01 and 9.99
2599. What amount of toxic substance and vehicle is contained in 10.0 of trituration (1:10)?
a. 0.5 and 9.5
*b. 1.0 and 9.0
c. 0.1 and 9.9
d. 0.05 and 9.95
e. 0.01 and 9.99
2600. What antacid can cause constipations, osteoporosis, and encephalopathy when taken for a long period of time?
a. Magnesium oxide
b. Calcium carbonate
c. Sodium bicarbonate
*d. Aluminium hydroxide
e. Sodium alginate
2601. What antacid can cause constipations, osteoporosis, and encephalopathy when taken for a long period of time?
a. Sodium bicarbonate
*b. Aluminium hydroxide
c. Calcium carbonate
d. Sodium alginate
e. Magnesium oxide
2602. What antibacterial agent is a part of the eradication therapy for H. pylori during the treatment of peptic ulcer disease of the stomach?
*a. Clarithromycin
b. Meropenem
c. Biseptol (Co-trimoxazole)
d. Gentamicin
e. Ceftriaxone
2603. What antibacterial agent is a part of the eradication therapy for H. pylori during the treatment of peptic ulcer disease of the stomach?
a. Gentamicin
b. Biseptol (Co-trimoxazole)
c. Meropenem
d. Ceftriaxone
*e. Clarithromycin
2604. What antibacterial agent is a part of the eradication therapy for H. pylori during the treatment of peptic ulcer disease of the stomach?
a. Meropenem
*b. Clarithromycin
c. Gentamicin
d. Biseptol (Co-trimoxazole)
e. Ceftriaxone
2605. What antibacterial drug is most effective against chronic gastritis associated with Helicobacter pylori infection?
a. Ceftriaxone
*b. Clarithromycin
c. Co-trimoxazole
d. Lincomycin
e. Levomycetin (Chloramphenicol)
2606. What antibacterial drug is most effective against chronic gastritis associated with Helicobacter pylori infection?
a. Ceftriaxone
b. Lincomycin
*c. Clarithromycin
d. Levomycetin (Chloramphenicol)
e. Co-trimoxazole
2607. What antibacterial drug is most effective against chronic gastritis associated with Helicobacter pylori infection?
a. Lincomycin
b. Co-trimoxazole
c. Levomycetin (Chloramphenicol)
d. Ceftriaxone
*e. Clarithromycin
2608. What antibiotic has beta-lactam cycle in its structure?
a. Doxycycline hyclate
*b. Benzylpenicillin potassium salt
c. Streptomycin sulfate
d. Chloramphenicol
e. Lincomycin hydrochloride
2609. What antibiotic has beta-lactam cycle in its structure?
a. Doxycycline hyclate
b. Chloramphenicol
c. Lincomycin hydrochloride
d. Streptomycin sulfate
*e. Benzylpenicillin potassium salt
2610. What antibiotic has beta-lactam cycle in its structure?
a. Lincomycin hydrochloride
b. Doxycycline hyclate
c. Chloramphenicol
*d. Benzylpenicillin potassium salt
e. Streptomycin sulfate
2611. What can be observed when aluminum-magnesium antacids and iron preparation are used simultaneously?
a. Decreased blood pressure
*b. Reduced effectiveness of iron preparations
c. Increased blood pressure
d. Increased effectiveness of antacids
e. Increased risk of hepatotoxicity
2612. What can be observed when aluminum-magnesium antacids and iron preparation are used simultaneously?
a. Decreased blood pressure
b. Increased effectiveness of antacids
c. Increased blood pressure
d. Increased risk of hepatotoxicity
*e. Reduced effectiveness of iron preparations
2613. What can be observed when aluminum-magnesium antacids and iron preparation are used simultaneously?
a. Increased effectiveness of antacids
b. Increased blood pressure
c. Decreased blood pressure
d. Increased risk of hepatotoxicity
*e. Reduced effectiveness of iron preparations
2614. What concept can be described as ''…an area of exchange with its characteristic system of economic relations between goods manufacturers and consumers''?
a. Agreement
*b. Market
c. Marketing
d. Sales
e. Management
2615. What concept can be described as ''…an area of exchange with its characteristic system of economic relations between goods manufacturers and consumers''?
a. Marketing
b. Agreement
*c. Market
d. Management
e. Sales
2616. What concept can be described as ''…an area of exchange with its characteristic system of economic relations between goods manufacturers and consumers''?
a. Sales
b. Marketing
*c. Market
d. Agreement
e. Management
2617. What corticosteroid medicinal substance has two fluorine atoms in its chemical structure?
*a. Fluocinolone acetonide
b. Hydrocortisone acetate
c. Prednisolone
d. Triamcinolone acetonide
e. Dexamethasone
2618. What corticosteroid medicinal substance has two fluorine atoms in its chemical structure?
a. Dexamethasone
b. Prednisolone
c. Triamcinolone acetonide
*d. Fluocinolone acetonide
e. Hydrocortisone acetate
2619. What corticosteroid medicinal substance has two fluorine atoms in its chemical structure?
a. Hydrocortisone acetate
b. Triamcinolone acetonide
c. Prednisolone
*d. Fluocinolone acetonide
e. Dexamethasone
2620. What department of a pharmaceutical wholesaler analyzes the demand for medicines and implements measures to stimulate their sales?
*a. Marketing
b. Transport
c. Storage
d. Automated accounting
e. Procurement
2621. What department of a pharmaceutical wholesaler analyzes the demand for medicines and implements measures to stimulate their sales?
a. Automated accounting
b. Procurement
*c. Marketing
d. Storage
e. Transport
2622. What department of a pharmaceutical wholesaler analyzes the demand for medicines and implements measures to stimulate their sales?
a. Automated accounting
b. Storage
*c. Marketing
d. Transport
e. Procurement
2623. What department of a wholesale firm is tasked with search for and analysis of potential suppliers' commercial offers, as well as concluding supply contracts and supervision of contract fulfillment?
*a. Supply department
b. Shipping department
c. Stores development
d. Finance department
e. Marketing department
2624. What department of a wholesale firm is tasked with search for and analysis of potential suppliers' commercial offers, as well as concluding supply contracts and supervision of contract fulfillment?
a. Marketing department
b. Shipping department
*c. Supply department
d. Stores development
e. Finance department
2625. What department of a wholesale firm is tasked with search for and analysis of potential suppliers' commercial offers, as well as concluding supply contracts and supervision of contract fulfillment?
a. Marketing department
b. Stores development
c. Shipping department
d. Finance department
*e. Supply department
2626. What device is used to disperse medicinal substances and homogenize ointments?
a. Dismembrator
b. Disintegrator
c. Double-slide tablet press machine
d. Excelsior
*e. Three-roll ointment mill
2627. What device is used to disperse medicinal substances and homogenize ointments?
a. Double-slide tablet press machine
b. Disintegrator
c. Dismembrator
*d. Three-roll ointment mill
e. Excelsior
2628. What device is used to disperse medicinal substances and homogenize ointments?
a. Double-slide tablet press machine
b. Excelsior
c. Dismembrator
d. Disintegrator
*e. Three-roll ointment mill
2629. What document is used during transactions with consumers, confirming the fact of sale or return of goods and the fact of receiving a payment or making a refund?
a. Request for a cash transfer
*b. Fiscal cash receipt for the goods/services
c. Cash book
d. Transactions ledger
e. Accompanying statement to the bag with cash
2630. What document is used during transactions with consumers, confirming the fact of sale or return of goods and the fact of receiving a payment or making a refund?
a. Request for a cash transfer
b. Accompanying statement to the bag with cash
c. Transactions ledger
*d. Fiscal cash receipt for the goods/services
e. Cash book
2631. What document is used during transactions with consumers, confirming the fact of sale or return of goods and the fact of receiving a payment or making a refund?
a. Request for a cash transfer
b. Cash book
*c. Fiscal cash receipt for the goods/services
d. Accompanying statement to the bag with cash
e. Transactions ledger
2632. What document must be added to the foreign-made medical products?
a. Extract from the State Register of Medicines
b. Technical regulations for the drug
*c. Conclusion on the quality of the drug imported into Ukraine
d. Written Control Passport
e. Drug Quality Standard
2633. What document must be added to the foreign-made medical products?
a. Technical regulations for the drug
b. Drug Quality Standard
c. Written Control Passport
*d. Conclusion on the quality of the drug imported into Ukraine
e. Extract from the State Register of Medicines
2634. What document must be added to the foreign-made medical products?
a. Technical regulations for the drug
b. Written Control Passport
c. Extract from the State Register of Medicines
*d. Conclusion on the quality of the drug imported into Ukraine
e. Drug Quality Standard
2635. What document must be prepared by a pharmacy's cashier for the cash collection?
a. Cash book
b. Cashier's check
*c. Accompanying statement
d. Payment order
e. Cash deposit slip
2636. What document must be prepared by a pharmacy's cashier for the cash collection?
a. Cash deposit slip
b. Cashier's check
c. Cash book
d. Payment order
*e. Accompanying statement
2637. What document must be prepared by a pharmacy's cashier for the cash collection?
a. Cashier's check
b. Cash deposit slip
c. Cash book
*d. Accompanying statement
e. Payment order
2638. What drug facilitates dissolution of cholesterol stones in the gallbladder?
*a. Ursodeoxycholic acid
b. Magnesium sulfate
c. Silybum dry extract
d. Cynara dry extract
e. Ademethionine
2639. What drug facilitates dissolution of cholesterol stones in the gallbladder?
a. Ademethionine
b. Magnesium sulfate
c. Silybum dry extract
d. Cynara dry extract
*e. Ursodeoxycholic acid
2640. What drug facilitates dissolution of cholesterol stones in the gallbladder?
a. Magnesium sulfate
b. Silybum dry extract
c. Ademethionine
*d. Ursodeoxycholic acid
e. Cynara dry extract
2641. What drug is used to treat hyperthyroidism?
a. Insulin
b. Prednisolone
c. Oxytocin
d. Metformin
*e. Mercazolil (Thiamazole)
2642. What drug is used to treat hyperthyroidism?
a. Metformin
*b. Mercazolil (Thiamazole)
c. Prednisolone
d. Oxytocin
e. Insulin
2643. What drug is used to treat hyperthyroidism?
a. Metformin
b. Prednisolone
c. Insulin
d. Oxytocin
*e. Mercazolil (Thiamazole)
2644. What drug should be used first in case of anaphylactic shock?
*a. Prednisolone
b. Euphyllin (Aminophylline)
c. Dibazol (Bendazol)
d. Loratadine
e. Fexofenadine
2645. What drug should be used first in case of anaphylactic shock?
a. Euphyllin (Aminophylline)
*b. Prednisolone
c. Fexofenadine
d. Loratadine
e. Dibazol (Bendazol)
2646. What drug should be used first in case of anaphylactic shock?
a. Euphyllin (Aminophylline)
b. Loratadine
c. Fexofenadine
*d. Prednisolone
e. Dibazol (Bendazol)
2647. What drug, due to beta-lactam ring in its structure, has positive reaction with hydroxylamine hydrochloride solution in the presence of sodium hydroxide with subsequent addition of iron (III) chloride solution?
*a. Amoxicillin trihydrate
b. Dibazol (Bendazol)
c. Papaverine hydrochloride
d. Phenazone
e. Metronidazole
2648. What drug, due to beta-lactam ring in its structure, has positive reaction with hydroxylamine hydrochloride solution in the presence of sodium hydroxide with subsequent addition of iron (III) chloride solution?
a. Dibazol (Bendazol)
b. Phenazone
c. Metronidazole
d. Papaverine hydrochloride
*e. Amoxicillin trihydrate
2649. What drug, due to beta-lactam ring in its structure, has positive reaction with hydroxylamine hydrochloride solution in the presence of sodium hydroxide with subsequent addition of iron (III) chloride solution?
a. Phenazone
b. Dibazol (Bendazol)
c. Metronidazole
d. Papaverine hydrochloride
*e. Amoxicillin trihydrate
2650. What economic parameter characterizes the effectiveness of the pharmacy's commercial, financial, and manufacturing activity?
a. Circulation of goods
b. Stock of goods
c. Inventory turnover
d. Work productivity
*e. Profitability
2651. What economic parameter characterizes the effectiveness of the pharmacy's commercial, financial, and manufacturing activity?
a. Inventory turnover
b. Stock of goods
c. Work productivity
d. Circulation of goods
*e. Profitability
2652. What economic parameter characterizes the effectiveness of the pharmacy's commercial, financial, and manufacturing activity?
a. Stock of goods
*b. Profitability
c. Circulation of goods
d. Work productivity
e. Inventory turnover
2653. What effect will anthracene derivatives have, if -OH- groups are located in both benzene rings of anthraquinone?
*a. Laxative
b. Diuretic
c. Litholytic
d. Choleretic
e. Sedative
2654. What effect will anthracene derivatives have, if -OH- groups are located in both benzene rings of anthraquinone?
a. Litholytic
b. Diuretic
c. Choleretic
d. Sedative
*e. Laxative
2655. What effect will anthracene derivatives have, if -OH- groups are located in both benzene rings of anthraquinone?
a. Sedative
b. Litholytic
c. Choleretic
d. Diuretic
*e. Laxative
2656. What factor enables the extraction of maximum amount of alkaloids from the herbal raw material?
*a. Certain value of the solution pH
b. Slight heating
c. Intense heating
d. Preliminary processing of raw materials for their saturation with 96% alcohol
e. Herbal raw material should be fresh
2657. What factor enables the extraction of maximum amount of alkaloids from the herbal raw material?
a. Herbal raw material should be fresh
*b. Certain value of the solution pH
c. Intense heating
d. Preliminary processing of raw materials for their saturation with 96% alcohol
e. Slight heating
2658. What factor enables the extraction of maximum amount of alkaloids from the herbal raw material?
a. Slight heating
b. Preliminary processing of raw materials for their saturation with 96% alcohol
*c. Certain value of the solution pH
d. Intense heating
e. Herbal raw material should be fresh
2659. What fatty oil can be used as a substitute for olive oil, when making injectable solutions?
a. Oleum Cucurbitae
b. Oleum Ricini
c. Oleum Maydis
d. Oleum Lini
*e. Oleum Amygdalarum
2660. What fatty oil can be used as a substitute for olive oil, when making injectable solutions?
a. Oleum Lini
b. Oleum Cucurbitae
*c. Oleum Amygdalarum
d. Oleum Ricini
e. Oleum Maydis
2661. What fatty oil can be used as a substitute for olive oil, when making injectable solutions?
a. Oleum Lini
b. Oleum Cucurbitae
c. Oleum Maydis
*d. Oleum Amygdalarum
e. Oleum Ricini
2662. What fatty oil is nondrying due to its oleic acid glyceride content?
*a. Ricini oleum
b. Helianthi oleum
c. Maydis oleum
d. Lini oleum
e. Cucurbitae oleum
2663. What fatty oil is nondrying due to its oleic acid glyceride content?
a. Helianthi oleum
b. Lini oleum
*c. Ricini oleum
d. Maydis oleum
e. Cucurbitae oleum
2664. What fatty oil is nondrying due to its oleic acid glyceride content?
a. Helianthi oleum
b. Maydis oleum
*c. Ricini oleum
d. Cucurbitae oleum
e. Lini oleum
2665. What fatty oil should be used to make an ointment with reparative properties?
a. Oleum Cacao
*b. Oleum Lini
c. Oleum Persicorum
d. Oleum Cucurbitae
e. Oleum Jecoris
2666. What fatty oil should be used to make an ointment with reparative properties?
a. Oleum Jecoris
*b. Oleum Lini
c. Oleum Persicorum
d. Oleum Cucurbitae
e. Oleum Cacao
2667. What fatty oil should be used to make an ointment with reparative properties?
a. Oleum Persicorum
b. Oleum Cacao
c. Oleum Jecoris
*d. Oleum Lini
e. Oleum Cucurbitae
2668. What final document is used for the preparation of the report on the discrepancies revealed in the course of inventory at the pharmacy?
*a. Act on the inventory results
b. Invoice
c. Commercial report
d. Inventory item description
e. Checklist
2669. What final document is used for the preparation of the report on the discrepancies revealed in the course of inventory at the pharmacy?
a. Commercial report
b. Inventory item description
c. Checklist
*d. Act on the inventory results
e. Invoice
2670. What final document is used for the preparation of the report on the discrepancies revealed in the course of inventory at the pharmacy?
a. Invoice
b. Inventory item description
*c. Act on the inventory results
d. Checklist
e. Commercial report
2671. What five-membered heterocycle is the basis of the structural formula of antiprotozoal and antibacterial drug metronidazole?
*a. Imidazole
b. Thiazole
c. Furan
d. Pyrrole
e. Pyrazole
2672. What five-membered heterocycle is the basis of the structural formula of antiprotozoal and antibacterial drug metronidazole?
a. Furan
b. Pyrrole
*c. Imidazole
d. Thiazole
e. Pyrazole
2673. What five-membered heterocycle is the basis of the structural formula of antiprotozoal and antibacterial drug metronidazole?
a. Thiazole
*b. Imidazole
c. Furan
d. Pyrazole
e. Pyrrole
2674. What group of antibacterial agents is used as first-line drugs in treatment of uncomplicated community-acquired pneumonia in young people?
*a. Semisynthetic penicillins
b. Aminoglycosides
c. Nitrofurans
d. Oxyquinolines
e. Tetracyclines
2675. What group of antibacterial agents is used as first-line drugs in treatment of uncomplicated community-acquired pneumonia in young people?
a. Oxyquinolines
b. Aminoglycosides
c. Tetracyclines
d. Nitrofurans
*e. Semisynthetic penicillins
2676. What group of antibacterial agents is used as first-line drugs in treatment of uncomplicated community-acquired pneumonia in young people?
a. Tetracyclines
b. Aminoglycosides
c. Oxyquinolines
*d. Semisynthetic penicillins
e. Nitrofurans
2677. What group of antibiotics should be prescribed to treat chlamydial infection?
*a. Macrolides
b. Carbapenems
c. Penicillins
d. Aminoglycosides
e. Cephalosprins
2678. What group of antibiotics should be prescribed to treat chlamydial infection?
a. Cephalosprins
b. Aminoglycosides
*c. Macrolides
d. Carbapenems
e. Penicillins
2679. What group of antibiotics should be prescribed to treat chlamydial infection?
a. Cephalosprins
b. Penicillins
c. Carbapenems
d. Aminoglycosides
*e. Macrolides
2680. What group of drugs can be characterized by a side effect, where the color perception of surrounding objects is distorted, making everything yellow-green tinted?
a. Antibiotics
b. Mucolytics
*c. Cardiac glycosides
d. Inhaled glucocorticoids
e. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
2681. What group of drugs can be characterized by a side effect, where the color perception of surrounding objects is distorted, making everything yellow-green tinted?
a. Inhaled glucocorticoids
b. Antibiotics
c. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
*d. Cardiac glycosides
e. Mucolytics
2682. What group of drugs can be characterized by a side effect, where the color perception of surrounding objects is distorted, making everything yellow-green tinted?
a. Mucolytics
b. Antibiotics
c. Inhaled glucocorticoids
d. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
*e. Cardiac glycosides
2683. What group of ointment bases vaseline (petroleum jelly) belongs to?
a. Hydrophilic bases
b. Silicone bases
*c. Hydrophobic bases
d. Adsorption bases
e. Diphylic (amphiphilic) emulsion bases
2684. What group of ointment bases vaseline (petroleum jelly) belongs to?
a. Silicone bases
b. Adsorption bases
c. Diphylic (amphiphilic) emulsion bases
d. Hydrophilic bases
*e. Hydrophobic bases
2685. What group of ointment bases vaseline (petroleum jelly) belongs to?
a. Silicone bases
b. Diphylic (amphiphilic) emulsion bases
c. Adsorption bases
d. Hydrophilic bases
*e. Hydrophobic bases
2686. What herbal drug produced form alkaloid-containing raw materials can be recommended for neurasthenia, insomnia, menopausal disorders?
a. Glaucine hydrochloride
b. Ergotamine
*c. Novopassit
d. Securinine nitrate
e. Vinblastine
2687. What herbal drug produced form alkaloid-containing raw materials can be recommended for neurasthenia, insomnia, menopausal disorders?
a. Glaucine hydrochloride
b. Securinine nitrate
c. Ergotamine
*d. Novopassit
e. Vinblastine
2688. What herbal drug produced form alkaloid-containing raw materials can be recommended for neurasthenia, insomnia, menopausal disorders?
a. Securinine nitrate
b. Ergotamine
*c. Novopassit
d. Vinblastine
e. Glaucine hydrochloride
2689. What herbal raw material contains alkaloid glaucine that has a strong antitussive effect?
a. Belladonna grass
b. Vinca minor grass
c. Chelidonium grass
*d. Glaucium flavum grass
e. Macleaya grass
2690. What herbal raw material contains alkaloid glaucine that has a strong antitussive effect?
a. Chelidonium grass
b. Belladonna grass
c. Vinca minor grass
d. Macleaya grass
*e. Glaucium flavum grass
2691. What herbal raw material contains alkaloid glaucine that has a strong antitussive effect?
a. Macleaya grass
b. Belladonna grass
c. Vinca minor grass
*d. Glaucium flavum grass
e. Chelidonium grass
2692. What herbal raw material is used as an industrial source of tannins?
a. Nettle leaves
*b. Cotinus coggygria leaves
c. Solidago canadensis grass
d. Persicaria hydropiper grass
e. Rose hips
2693. What herbal raw material is used as an industrial source of tannins?
a. Persicaria hydropiper grass
b. Nettle leaves
c. Rose hips
*d. Cotinus coggygria leaves
e. Solidago canadensis grass
2694. What herbal raw material is used as an industrial source of tannins?
a. Rose hips
b. Persicaria hydropiper grass
c. Nettle leaves
*d. Cotinus coggygria leaves
e. Solidago canadensis grass
2695. What herbal raw material is used for the industrial production of Quercetin medicine?
*a. Fructus Sophorae japonicae
b. Fructus Hippophaes rhamnoides
c. Herba Polygonii avicularis
d. Herba Violae tricoloris
e. Flores Helichrysi arenarii
2696. What herbal raw material is used for the industrial production of Quercetin medicine?
a. Fructus Hippophaes rhamnoides
b. Herba Violae tricoloris
c. Flores Helichrysi arenarii
d. Herba Polygonii avicularis
*e. Fructus Sophorae japonicae
2697. What herbal raw material is used for the industrial production of Quercetin medicine?
a. Herba Polygonii avicularis
b. Flores Helichrysi arenarii
c. Fructus Hippophaes rhamnoides
d. Herba Violae tricoloris
*e. Fructus Sophorae japonicae
2698. What hypotensive drug is an agent of choice for the patients suffering from arterial hypertension with concomitant type I diabetes mellitus?
*a. Lisinopril
b. Atenolol
c. Labetalol
d. Carvedilol
e. Hydrochlorothiazide
2699. What hypotensive drug is an agent of choice for the patients suffering from arterial hypertension with concomitant type I diabetes mellitus?
*a. Lisinopril
b. Carvedilol
c. Hydrochlorothiazide
d. Atenolol
e. Labetalol
2700. What hypotensive drug is an agent of choice for the patients suffering from arterial hypertension with concomitant type I diabetes mellitus?
*a. Lisinopril
b. Labetalol
c. Hydrochlorothiazide
d. Atenolol
e. Carvedilol
2701. What imidazole derivative affects anaerobic microorganisms and protozoa and is effective against mixed infections?
a. Asparcam (Potassium aspartate and  magnesium aspartate)
b. Caffeine
c. Camphor
d. Dibazol (Bendazol)
*e. Metronidazole
2702. What imidazole derivative affects anaerobic microorganisms and protozoa and is effective against mixed infections?
a. Asparcam (Potassium aspartate and  magnesium aspartate)
b. Camphor
c. Dibazol (Bendazol)
d. Caffeine
*e. Metronidazole
2703. What imidazole derivative affects anaerobic microorganisms and protozoa and is effective against mixed infections?
a. Camphor
b. Caffeine
*c. Metronidazole
d. Asparcam (Potassium aspartate and  magnesium aspartate)
e. Dibazol (Bendazol)
2704. What indicator is used in iodometry for quantitative determination of caffeine in caffeine and sodium benzoate?
a. Bromthymol blue
b. Methyl orange
c. Potassium chromate
*d. Starch
e. Eriochrome black
2705. What indicator is used in iodometry for quantitative determination of caffeine in caffeine and sodium benzoate?
a. Eriochrome black
b. Methyl orange
c. Bromthymol blue
*d. Starch
e. Potassium chromate
2706. What indicator is used in iodometry for quantitative determination of caffeine in caffeine and sodium benzoate?
a. Methyl orange
b. Potassium chromate
*c. Starch
d. Eriochrome black
e. Bromthymol blue
2707. What indicator of the pharmacy's financial performance is determined by the volume of sales, where the income from sales is equal to the expenses of the pharmacy?
*a. Breakeven point
b. Goods turnover
c. Markup level
d. Profit
e. Profitability
2708. What indicator of the pharmacy's financial performance is determined by the volume of sales, where the income from sales is equal to the expenses of the pharmacy?
*a. Breakeven point
b. Profitability
c. Markup level
d. Profit
e. Goods turnover
2709. What indicator of the pharmacy's financial performance is determined by the volume of sales, where the income from sales is equal to the expenses of the pharmacy?
a. Markup level
b. Goods turnover
*c. Breakeven point
d. Profit
e. Profitability
2710. What is an effective way of preserving the stability of the medicinal substances that are thermolabile and have low stability?
*a. Lyophilization
b. Ultraviolet radiation
c. Hydrolysis
d. Boiling
e. Filtration
2711. What is an effective way of preserving the stability of the medicinal substances that are thermolabile and have low stability?
a. Hydrolysis
*b. Lyophilization
c. Ultraviolet radiation
d. Boiling
e. Filtration
2712. What is an effective way of preserving the stability of the medicinal substances that are thermolabile and have low stability?
a. Ultraviolet radiation
b. Filtration
*c. Lyophilization
d. Boiling
e. Hydrolysis
2713. What is present in the structure of procaine hydrochloride, making its alkalimetric titration possible?
a. Ester bond
*b. Bound hydrochloric acid
c. Unsubstituted aromatic cycle
d. Residue of n-aminobenzoic acid
e. Diethylamino group
2714. What is present in the structure of procaine hydrochloride, making its alkalimetric titration possible?
a. Ester bond
b. Diethylamino group
c. Residue of n-aminobenzoic acid
*d. Bound hydrochloric acid
e. Unsubstituted aromatic cycle
2715. What is present in the structure of procaine hydrochloride, making its alkalimetric titration possible?
a. Residue of n-aminobenzoic acid
b. Diethylamino group
c. Unsubstituted aromatic cycle
*d. Bound hydrochloric acid
e. Ester bond
2716. What is the amount of the value added tax (VAT) on the medical products sold by a pharmacy.
*a. 7%
b. 25%
c. 5%
d. 10%
e. 15%
2717. What is the amount of the value added tax (VAT) on the medical products sold by a pharmacy.
a. 15%
b. 5%
*c. 7%
d. 25%
e. 10%
2718. What is the amount of the value added tax (VAT) on the medical products sold by a pharmacy.
a. 25%
*b. 7%
c. 15%
d. 5%
e. 10%
2719. What is the driving force of the diffusion process during the extraction of a herbal raw material?
*a. Different concentration of the active substance in the raw material and extractant
b. Brownian motion of the particles
c. Presence of a film membrane
d. High temperature of the extractant
e. High polarity of the extractant
2720. What is the driving force of the diffusion process during the extraction of a herbal raw material?
a. Brownian motion of the particles
b. High temperature of the extractant
c. High polarity of the extractant
*d. Different concentration of the active substance in the raw material and extractant
e. Presence of a film membrane
2721. What is the driving force of the diffusion process during the extraction of a herbal raw material?
a. Presence of a film membrane
*b. Different concentration of the active substance in the raw material and extractant
c. High polarity of the extractant
d. Brownian motion of the particles
e. High temperature of the extractant
2722. What is the duration of the leave due to pregnancy and childbirth?
*a. 126 calendar days
b. 56 calendar days
c. 59 working days
d. 70 working days
e. 90 calendar days
2723. What is the duration of the leave due to pregnancy and childbirth?
*a. 126 calendar days
b. 59 working days
c. 70 working days
d. 56 calendar days
e. 90 calendar days
2724. What is the duration of the leave due to pregnancy and childbirth?
a. 90 calendar days
*b. 126 calendar days
c. 70 working days
d. 56 calendar days
e. 59 working days
2725. What is the function of anhydrous lanolin in the suppository mass used for suppositories prepared via hand rolling?
a. Preservative
b. Solubilizer
c. Solvent
d. Emollient
*e. Plasticizer
2726. What is the function of anhydrous lanolin in the suppository mass used for suppositories prepared via hand rolling?
a. Solubilizer
b. Emollient
c. Preservative
*d. Plasticizer
e. Solvent
2727. What is the function of anhydrous lanolin in the suppository mass used for suppositories prepared via hand rolling?
a. Solvent
*b. Plasticizer
c. Emollient
d. Solubilizer
e. Preservative
2728. What is the fundamental difference of the Japanese management model?
*a. Collectivism
b. Strict control procedure
c. Individualism
d. Strictly formalized management system
e. Focus on individual results
2729. What is the fundamental difference of the Japanese management model?
a. Individualism
b. Strictly formalized management system
c. Focus on individual results
*d. Collectivism
e. Strict control procedure
2730. What is the fundamental difference of the Japanese management model?
a. Strict control procedure
*b. Collectivism
c. Individualism
d. Strictly formalized management system
e. Focus on individual results
2731. What is the mandatory component of medical product advertising for end users, according to the law of Ukraine "On Advertising"?
*a. Warning that self-medication can be harmful to health
b. Naming and mentioning celebrities, movie and cartoon characters, competent authorities
c. References to the cases of successful drug use
d. Comparison with other medical products
e. Reference to the drug as the most effective
2732. What is the mandatory component of medical product advertising for end users, according to the law of Ukraine "On Advertising"?
a. Reference to the drug as the most effective
b. Naming and mentioning celebrities, movie and cartoon characters, competent authorities
*c. Warning that self-medication can be harmful to health
d. Comparison with other medical products
e. References to the cases of successful drug use
2733. What is the mandatory component of medical product advertising for end users, according to the law of Ukraine "On Advertising"?
a. References to the cases of successful drug use
b. Comparison with other medical products
c. Reference to the drug as the most effective
*d. Warning that self-medication can be harmful to health
e. Naming and mentioning celebrities, movie and cartoon characters, competent authorities
2734. What is the medicine of choice for treatment of acute pyelonephritis in a woman, who is at the I trimester of her pregnancy?
*a. Amoxicillin
b. Ofloxacin
c. Co-trimoxazole
d. Gentamicin
e. Norfloxacin
2735. What is the medicine of choice for treatment of acute pyelonephritis in a woman, who is at the I trimester of her pregnancy?
a. Co-trimoxazole
b. Gentamicin
*c. Amoxicillin
d. Norfloxacin
e. Ofloxacin
2736. What is the medicine of choice for treatment of acute pyelonephritis in a woman, who is at the I trimester of her pregnancy?
a. Co-trimoxazole
b. Gentamicin
c. Ofloxacin
*d. Amoxicillin
e. Norfloxacin
2737. What is the minimum amount of boric acid that can be weighed on the BP-1 hand scales?
a. 0.04 g
*b. 0.02 g
c. 0.03 g
d. 0.01 g
e. 0.05 g
2738. What is the minimum amount of boric acid that can be weighed on the BP-1 hand scales?
a. 0.05 g
b. 0.01 g
c. 0.03 g
d. 0.04 g
*e. 0.02 g
2739. What is the minimum amount of boric acid that can be weighed on the BP-1 hand scales?
a. 0.05 g
b. 0.03 g
c. 0.01 g
*d. 0.02 g
e. 0.04 g
2740. What is the minimum permissible total area of a pharmaceutical sales point, according to the current Licensing Requrements?
*a. No less than 18 m^2
b. No less than 250 m^2
c. No less than 50 m^2
d. No less than 30 m^2
e. No less than 40 m^2
2741. What is the minimum permissible total area of a pharmaceutical sales point, according to the current Licensing Requrements?
*a. No less than 18 m^2
b. No less than 30 m^2
c. No less than 40 m^2
d. No less than 50 m^2
e. No less than 250 m^2
2742. What is the minimum permissible total area of a pharmaceutical sales point, according to the current Licensing Requrements?
a. No less than 250 m^2
b. No less than 30 m^2
*c. No less than 18 m^2
d. No less than 50 m^2
e. No less than 40 m^2
2743. What is the name of the ability to restore the properties of a heterogenous system by perturbation?
a. Dispersion
b. Granulation
c. Emulsification
d. Extraction
*e. Resuspension
2744. What is the name of the ability to restore the properties of a heterogenous system by perturbation?
a. Dispersion
b. Granulation
c. Extraction
*d. Resuspension
e. Emulsification
2745. What is the name of the settlement document printed by the registrar of settlement operations, when making settlements for the goods sold or services provided?
a. Invoice
b. Sales receipt
c. Settlement receipt
*d. Cash register fiscal receipt
e. Receipt
2746. What is the name of the settlement document printed by the registrar of settlement operations, when making settlements for the goods sold or services provided?
a. Receipt
b. Sales receipt
c. Invoice
d. Settlement receipt
*e. Cash register fiscal receipt
2747. What is the name of the settlement document printed by the registrar of settlement operations, when making settlements for the goods sold or services provided?
a. Settlement receipt
b. Sales receipt
c. Invoice
d. Receipt
*e. Cash register fiscal receipt
2748. What is the purpose of bulking agents in production of tablets?
a. To improve adhesion of particles to each other
b. To improve granulate flowability
c. To improve the taste
*d. To obtain tablets of a certain mass
e. To improve tablet breakup
2749. What is the purpose of bulking agents in production of tablets?
a. To improve tablet breakup
*b. To obtain tablets of a certain mass
c. To improve granulate flowability
d. To improve adhesion of particles to each other
e. To improve the taste
2750. What is the purpose of bulking agents in production of tablets?
a. To improve tablet breakup
b. To improve granulate flowability
*c. To obtain tablets of a certain mass
d. To improve the taste
e. To improve adhesion of particles to each other
2751. What is the purpose of injectablettae tablets?
*a. Obtaining injectable solutions
b. Sublingual use
c. Implantation
d. Obtaining solutions for various pharmaceutical purposes
e. Oral use
2752. What is the purpose of injectablettae tablets?
a. Implantation
b. Sublingual use
c. Oral use
*d. Obtaining injectable solutions
e. Obtaining solutions for various pharmaceutical purposes
2753. What is the purpose of injectablettae tablets?
a. Obtaining solutions for various pharmaceutical purposes
*b. Obtaining injectable solutions
c. Oral use
d. Sublingual use
e. Implantation
2754. What is the rational method of introducing magnesium oxide into an oil emulsion?
*a. Introduction as a suspension into the prepared emulsion
b. Dissolution in oil
c. Dissolution in the prepared emulsion
d. Dissolution in water to prepare the primary emulsion
e. Comminution with the water intended for the dilution of the primary emulsion
2755. What is the rational method of introducing magnesium oxide into an oil emulsion?
*a. Introduction as a suspension into the prepared emulsion
b. Dissolution in the prepared emulsion
c. Dissolution in water to prepare the primary emulsion
d. Comminution with the water intended for the dilution of the primary emulsion
e. Dissolution in oil
2756. What is the rational method of introducing magnesium oxide into an oil emulsion?
*a. Introduction as a suspension into the prepared emulsion
b. Dissolution in the prepared emulsion
c. Dissolution in water to prepare the primary emulsion
d. Dissolution in oil
e. Comminution with the water intended for the dilution of the primary emulsion
2757. What is the shortest goods distribution channel for medical products?
a. One-level
*b. Zero-level
c. Four-level
d. Two-level
e. Three-level
2758. What is the shortest goods distribution channel for medical products?
a. Two-level
b. One-level
*c. Zero-level
d. Three-level
e. Four-level
2759. What is the shortest goods distribution channel for medical products?
a. Two-level
b. One-level
c. Three-level
*d. Zero-level
e. Four-level
2760. What lubricants are used in tablet manufacturing?
a. Starch paste
*b. Calcium stearate, stearic acid
c. Solutions of high-molecular  compounds
d. Water, ethanol
e. Tween 80, Aerosil
2761. What lubricants are used in tablet manufacturing?
a. Starch paste
*b. Calcium stearate, stearic acid
c. Tween 80, Aerosil
d. Water, ethanol
e. Solutions of high-molecular  compounds
2762. What lubricants are used in tablet manufacturing?
a. Starch paste
*b. Calcium stearate, stearic acid
c. Water, ethanol
d. Solutions of high-molecular  compounds
e. Tween 80, Aerosil
2763. What means of demand stimulation can be applied by pharmacy management among its employees?
a. -
*b. Bonuses
c. In-store advertising
d. Layout of medical products in shop-windows and on shelves
e. Coupons
2764. What means of demand stimulation can be applied by pharmacy management among its employees?
a. Coupons
b. -
c. In-store advertising
d. Layout of medical products in shop-windows and on shelves
*e. Bonuses
2765. What means of demand stimulation can be applied by pharmacy management among its employees?
a. Coupons
b. In-store advertising
c. -
d. Layout of medical products in shop-windows and on shelves
*e. Bonuses
2766. What medicinal agents must be manufactured in aseptic conditions followed by thermal sterilization with high-pressure saturated steam?
a. 2% collargol solution for infants
b. Liquid ingestible antibiotics
c. Injection solutions with thermolabile substances
d. Concentrated solutions for burette systems
*e. Injection solutions with thermostable substances
2767. What medicinal agents must be manufactured in aseptic conditions followed by thermal sterilization with high-pressure saturated steam?
a. Injection solutions with thermolabile substances
b. Liquid ingestible antibiotics
*c. Injection solutions with thermostable substances
d. Concentrated solutions for burette systems
e. 2% collargol solution for infants
2768. What medicinal agents must be manufactured in aseptic conditions followed by thermal sterilization with high-pressure saturated steam?
a. Injection solutions with thermolabile substances
b. Liquid ingestible antibiotics
c. Concentrated solutions for burette systems
d. 2% collargol solution for infants
*e. Injection solutions with thermostable substances
2769. What medicinal plant has anti-inflammatory and expectorant properties due to its content of triterpene saponins?
a. Orthosiphon stamineus
b. Aralia mandshurica
*c. Glycyrrhiza glabra
d. Panax ginseng
e. Astragalus dasyanthus
2770. What medicinal plant has anti-inflammatory and expectorant properties due to its content of triterpene saponins?
a. Panax ginseng
*b. Glycyrrhiza glabra
c. Astragalus dasyanthus
d. Orthosiphon stamineus
e. Aralia mandshurica
2771. What medicinal plant has anti-inflammatory and expectorant properties due to its content of triterpene saponins?
a. Panax ginseng
b. Orthosiphon stamineus
c. Astragalus dasyanthus
d. Aralia mandshurica
*e. Glycyrrhiza glabra
2772. What medicinal substance can be identified using hydroxamic test?
*a. Aceclidine
b. Metronidazole
c. Nitroxoline
d. Bendazol
e. Nicotinic acid
2773. What medicinal substance can be identified using hydroxamic test?
a. Bendazol
*b. Aceclidine
c. Nicotinic acid
d. Nitroxoline
e. Metronidazole
2774. What medicinal substance can be mixed with the powder mass without an additional comminution?
a. Menthol
b. Camphor
*c. Starch
d. Streptocide (Sulfanilamide)
e. Salicylic acid
2775. What medicinal substance can be mixed with the powder mass without an additional comminution?
a. Menthol
b. Salicylic acid
c. Camphor
*d. Starch
e. Streptocide (Sulfanilamide)
2776. What medicinal substance can be mixed with the powder mass without an additional comminution?
a. Streptocide (Sulfanilamide)
*b. Starch
c. Camphor
d. Menthol
e. Salicylic acid
2777. What medicinal substance during interaction with a silver nitrate solution forms a white precipitate that quickly colors yellowish and then turns black?
*a. Sodium thiosulfate
b. Sodium bromide
c. Hydrogen peroxide
d. Sodium chloride
e. Sodium iodide
2778. What medicinal substance during interaction with a silver nitrate solution forms a white precipitate that quickly colors yellowish and then turns black?
*a. Sodium thiosulfate
b. Sodium iodide
c. Sodium bromide
d. Sodium chloride
e. Hydrogen peroxide
2779. What medicinal substance during interaction with a silver nitrate solution forms a white precipitate that quickly colors yellowish and then turns black?
a. Sodium bromide
b. Sodium iodide
c. Hydrogen peroxide
d. Sodium chloride
*e. Sodium thiosulfate
2780. What medicinal substance has an imidazole fragment in its structure?
*a. Pilocarpine hydrochloride
b. Nitrofural
c. Phenazone
d. Nicotinic acid
e. Thiamine bromide
2781. What medicinal substance has an imidazole fragment in its structure?
a. Nitrofural
b. Phenazone
c. Nicotinic acid
d. Thiamine bromide
*e. Pilocarpine hydrochloride
2782. What medicinal substance has an imidazole fragment in its structure?
a. Phenazone
b. Thiamine bromide
*c. Pilocarpine hydrochloride
d. Nicotinic acid
e. Nitrofural
2783. What medicinal substance has benzimidazole in its structure?
a. Diphenhydramine hydrochloride  (Dimedrol)
b. Mercazolil (Thiamazole)
c. Nitrofural (Furacilin)
*d. Dibazol (Bendazol)
e. Metamizole sodium salt (Analgin)
2784. What medicinal substance has benzimidazole in its structure?
a. Diphenhydramine hydrochloride  (Dimedrol)
b. Nitrofural (Furacilin)
*c. Dibazol (Bendazol)
d. Metamizole sodium salt (Analgin)
e. Mercazolil (Thiamazole)
2785. What medicinal substance has benzimidazole in its structure?
a. Metamizole sodium salt (Analgin)
*b. Dibazol (Bendazol)
c. Mercazolil (Thiamazole)
d. Nitrofural (Furacilin)
e. Diphenhydramine hydrochloride  (Dimedrol)
2786. What medicinal substance is a derivative of morphinan?
*a. Codeine
b. Caffeine
c. Cocaine hydrochloride
d. Pachycarpine hydroiodide
e. Quinine sulfate
2787. What medicinal substance is a derivative of morphinan?
*a. Codeine
b. Caffeine
c. Pachycarpine hydroiodide
d. Cocaine hydrochloride
e. Quinine sulfate
2788. What medicinal substance is a derivative of morphinan?
*a. Codeine
b. Caffeine
c. Quinine sulfate
d. Cocaine hydrochloride
e. Pachycarpine hydroiodide
2789. What medicinal substance must fill only 2/3 of the vial before sterilization?
*a. Sodium bicarbonate
b. Calcium chloride
c. Hexamethylenetetramine
d. Euphyllin (Aminophylline)
e. Sodium chloride
2790. What medicinal substance must fill only 2/3 of the vial before sterilization?
a. Calcium chloride
b. Hexamethylenetetramine
*c. Sodium bicarbonate
d. Sodium chloride
e. Euphyllin (Aminophylline)
2791. What medicinal substance must fill only 2/3 of the vial before sterilization?
a. Euphyllin (Aminophylline)
b. Sodium chloride
*c. Sodium bicarbonate
d. Hexamethylenetetramine
e. Calcium chloride
2792. What medicine is recommended to reduce the risk of gastrointestinal bleeding during a long-term treatment with an acetylsalicylic acid-based antiaggregant?
a. Ceftriaxone
b. Spironolactone
*c. Omeprazole
d. Metamizole sodium
e. Prednisolone
2793. What medicine is recommended to reduce the risk of gastrointestinal bleeding during a long-term treatment with an acetylsalicylic acid-based antiaggregant?
a. Prednisolone
b. Ceftriaxone
c. Spironolactone
*d. Omeprazole
e. Metamizole sodium
2794. What medicine is recommended to reduce the risk of gastrointestinal bleeding during a long-term treatment with an acetylsalicylic acid-based antiaggregant?
a. Spironolactone
*b. Omeprazole
c. Metamizole sodium
d. Ceftriaxone
e. Prednisolone
2795. What medicine is simultaneously a mucolytic and an antidote against a paracetamol overdose?
a. Bromhexine
*b. Acetylcysteine
c. Ambroxol
d. Carbocysteine
e. Trypsin
2796. What medicine is simultaneously a mucolytic and an antidote against a paracetamol overdose?
a. Carbocysteine
b. Ambroxol
c. Bromhexine
d. Trypsin
*e. Acetylcysteine
2797. What medicine is simultaneously a mucolytic and an antidote against a paracetamol overdose?
a. Carbocysteine
b. Ambroxol
c. Trypsin
d. Bromhexine
*e. Acetylcysteine
2798. What medicine is used for anesthesia and cannot be prescribed to outpatients, according to Decree №360?
*a. Sodium thiopental
b. Suprastin (Chloropyramine)
c. Anaesthesin (Benzocaine)
d. Metoprolol
e. Midecamycin
2799. What medicine is used for anesthesia and cannot be prescribed to outpatients, according to Decree №360?
a. Anaesthesin (Benzocaine)
b. Metoprolol
*c. Sodium thiopental
d. Suprastin (Chloropyramine)
e. Midecamycin
2800. What medicine is used for anesthesia and cannot be prescribed to outpatients, according to Decree №360?
a. Metoprolol
*b. Sodium thiopental
c. Suprastin (Chloropyramine)
d. Anaesthesin (Benzocaine)
e. Midecamycin
2801. What medicine is used for the symptomatic treatment of meteorism?
*a. Simethicone
b. Papaverine
c. Drotaverine
d. Almagel (Algeldrate + magnesium hydroxide)
e. Platyphyllin
2802. What medicine is used for the symptomatic treatment of meteorism?
a. Almagel (Algeldrate + magnesium hydroxide)
*b. Simethicone
c. Platyphyllin
d. Papaverine
e. Drotaverine
2803. What medicine is used for the symptomatic treatment of meteorism?
a. Platyphyllin
b. Papaverine
*c. Simethicone
d. Drotaverine
e. Almagel (Algeldrate + magnesium hydroxide)
2804. What medicine obtained from ergot is used in gynecology and has a hemostatic effect?
*a. Ergotamine hydrotartrate
b. Digitoxin
c. Vincaton
d. Galantamine hydrobromide
e. Vinblastine
2805. What medicine obtained from ergot is used in gynecology and has a hemostatic effect?
a. Vinblastine
b. Digitoxin
c. Vincaton
d. Galantamine hydrobromide
*e. Ergotamine hydrotartrate
2806. What medicine obtained from ergot is used in gynecology and has a hemostatic effect?
a. Vinblastine
b. Vincaton
c. Digitoxin
*d. Ergotamine hydrotartrate
e. Galantamine hydrobromide
2807. What medicine would be most advisable for symptomatic treatment of constipation in pregnant women?
a. Bisacodyl
b. Macrogol
*c. Lactulose
d. Ononis herbal medicine
e. Senadexine (sennosides A and B)
2808. What medicine would be most advisable for symptomatic treatment of constipation in pregnant women?
a. Senadexine (sennosides A and B)
b. Bisacodyl
c. Ononis herbal medicine
d. Macrogol
*e. Lactulose
2809. What medicine would be most advisable for symptomatic treatment of constipation in pregnant women?
a. Senadexine (sennosides A and B)
b. Ononis herbal medicine
*c. Lactulose
d. Bisacodyl
e. Macrogol
2810. What medicine would be the best choice for a pregnant woman with signs of acute respiratory viral disease, who needs to lower her body temperature?
*a. Paracetamol
b. Acetylsalicylic acid
c. Indomethacin
d. Nimesulide
e. Diclofenac sodium
2811. What medicine would be the best choice for a pregnant woman with signs of acute respiratory viral disease, who needs to lower her body temperature?
a. Acetylsalicylic acid
b. Indomethacin
c. Diclofenac sodium
*d. Paracetamol
e. Nimesulide
2812. What medicine would be the best choice for a pregnant woman with signs of acute respiratory viral disease, who needs to lower her body temperature?
a. Diclofenac sodium
b. Acetylsalicylic acid
*c. Paracetamol
d. Nimesulide
e. Indomethacin
2813. What medicines cannot be advertised in pharmacies and their structural units?
*a. Prescription medicines
b. Cosmetics
c. Disinfectants
d. Over-the-counter medicines
e. Dietary supplements
2814. What medicines cannot be advertised in pharmacies and their structural units?
*a. Prescription medicines
b. Disinfectants
c. Over-the-counter medicines
d. Cosmetics
e. Dietary supplements
2815. What medicines cannot be advertised in pharmacies and their structural units?
a. Over-the-counter medicines
b. Disinfectants
c. Dietary supplements
*d. Prescription medicines
e. Cosmetics
2816. What medicines should be listed at the beginning of an extemporaneous drug formulation according to the regulations?
*a. Narcotic substances
b. Solutions
c. All medicines are written in a random order
d. Medicines included in the Essential Medicines List
e. Substances that are hard to comminute
2817. What medicines should be listed at the beginning of an extemporaneous drug formulation according to the regulations?
a. All medicines are written in a random order
*b. Narcotic substances
c. Substances that are hard to comminute
d. Medicines included in the Essential Medicines List
e. Solutions
2818. What medicines should be listed at the beginning of an extemporaneous drug formulation according to the regulations?
a. Solutions
b. Medicines included in the Essential Medicines List
*c. Narcotic substances
d. Substances that are hard to comminute
e. All medicines are written in a random order
2819. What method is recommended by the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine for quantitative determination of potassium chloride substance that is used in treatment of hypokalemia?
a. Cerimetry
b. Iodometry
c. Bromatometry
d. Polarimetry
*e. Argentometry
2820. What method is recommended by the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine for quantitative determination of potassium chloride substance that is used in treatment of hypokalemia?
a. Iodometry
b. Bromatometry
c. Cerimetry
d. Polarimetry
*e. Argentometry
2821. What method is recommended by the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine for quantitative determination of potassium chloride substance that is used in treatment of hypokalemia?
a. Iodometry
b. Polarimetry
c. Cerimetry
d. Bromatometry
*e. Argentometry
2822. What method is used to prepare a suspension with basic bismuth nitrate?
*a. Dispersion with turbidization
b. Chemical condensation
c. Solvent substitution
d. Physical condensation
e. Continental method
2823. What method is used to prepare a suspension with basic bismuth nitrate?
a. Continental method
b. Chemical condensation
*c. Dispersion with turbidization
d. Physical condensation
e. Solvent substitution
2824. What method is used to prepare a suspension with basic bismuth nitrate?
a. Physical condensation
b. Chemical condensation
*c. Dispersion with turbidization
d. Solvent substitution
e. Continental method
2825. What method is used to sterilize the eye drops containing benzylpenicillin sodium salt?
a. Flowing steam
*b. Not subject to sterilization
c. Hot air
d. Steam under pressure
e. Ultraviolet radiation
2826. What method is used to sterilize the eye drops containing benzylpenicillin sodium salt?
a. Hot air
b. Steam under pressure
*c. Not subject to sterilization
d. Ultraviolet radiation
e. Flowing steam
2827. What method is used to sterilize the eye drops containing benzylpenicillin sodium salt?
a. Steam under pressure
*b. Not subject to sterilization
c. Ultraviolet radiation
d. Hot air
e. Flowing steam
2828. What method of analysis takes into account the strengths and weaknesses of a pharmaceutical company, as well as opportunities and threats at the pharmaceutical market, in order to determine marketing goals, strategies, and specific measures that would make it possible to adapt the company's potential to market trends and conditions?
*a. SWOT analysis
b. VEN analysis
c. ABC analysis
d. XYZ analysis
e. Meta-analysis
2829. What method of analysis takes into account the strengths and weaknesses of a pharmaceutical company, as well as opportunities and threats at the pharmaceutical market, in order to determine marketing goals, strategies, and specific measures that would make it possible to adapt the company's potential to market trends and conditions?
a. ABC analysis
b. Meta-analysis
c. VEN analysis
*d. SWOT analysis
e. XYZ analysis
2830. What method of analysis takes into account the strengths and weaknesses of a pharmaceutical company, as well as opportunities and threats at the pharmaceutical market, in order to determine marketing goals, strategies, and specific measures that would make it possible to adapt the company's potential to market trends and conditions?
a. Meta-analysis
b. VEN analysis
*c. SWOT analysis
d. XYZ analysis
e. ABC analysis
2831. What minimum amount of a toxic substance can be weighed on one-gram hand scales?
a. 0.02 g
b. 0.1 g
*c. 0.05 g
d. 0.03 g
e. 0.04 g
2832. What minimum amount of a toxic substance can be weighed on one-gram hand scales?
a. 0.03 g
b. 0.02 g
c. 0.04 g
d. 0.1 g
*e. 0.05 g
2833. What minimum amount of a toxic substance can be weighed on one-gram hand scales?
a. 0.03 g
b. 0.04 g
*c. 0.05 g
d. 0.1 g
e. 0.02 g
2834. What mixing method is carried out by repeatedly pumping the liquid through the apparatus, using a pump or nozzles?
a. Acoustic
*b. Circulation
c. Mechanical
d. Pneumatic
e. Ultrasonic
2835. What mixing method is carried out by repeatedly pumping the liquid through the apparatus, using a pump or nozzles?
a. Pneumatic
b. Mechanical
c. Ultrasonic
*d. Circulation
e. Acoustic
2836. What mixing method is carried out by repeatedly pumping the liquid through the apparatus, using a pump or nozzles?
a. Pneumatic
b. Ultrasonic
c. Mechanical
*d. Circulation
e. Acoustic
2837. What modern method is used to fill ampoules with injectable solutions?
a. Chamber filling
b. Vacuum filling
c. Ultrasonic filling
*d. Syringe filling
e. Vortex filling
2838. What modern method is used to fill ampoules with injectable solutions?
a. Vortex filling
*b. Syringe filling
c. Ultrasonic filling
d. Vacuum filling
e. Chamber filling
2839. What modern method is used to fill ampoules with injectable solutions?
a. Vortex filling
b. Ultrasonic filling
*c. Syringe filling
d. Chamber filling
e. Vacuum filling
2840. What morphological feature is diagnostic for the Matricaria chamomilla herbal raw material?
*a. Conical, glabrous, and hollow receptacle
b. Spherical receptacle with membranous bracts
c. Solid spherical receptacle
d. Curved hemispherical receptacle with membranous bracts
e. Solid hemispherical receptacle
2841. What morphological feature is diagnostic for the Matricaria chamomilla herbal raw material?
a. Curved hemispherical receptacle with membranous bracts
b. Solid spherical receptacle
c. Spherical receptacle with membranous bracts
*d. Conical, glabrous, and hollow receptacle
e. Solid hemispherical receptacle
2842. What morphological feature is diagnostic for the Matricaria chamomilla herbal raw material?
a. Curved hemispherical receptacle with membranous bracts
b. Solid spherical receptacle
c. Spherical receptacle with membranous bracts
d. Solid hemispherical receptacle
*e. Conical, glabrous, and hollow receptacle
2843. What nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug is indicated for treatment of the patient's rheumatoid arthritis, if this patient has a history of peptic ulcer disease of the stomach?
*a. Celecoxib
b. Ibuprofen
c. Indomethacin
d. Acetylsalicylic acid
e. Diclofenac sodium
2844. What nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug is indicated for treatment of the patient's rheumatoid arthritis, if this patient has a history of peptic ulcer disease of the stomach?
a. Acetylsalicylic acid
*b. Celecoxib
c. Ibuprofen
d. Indomethacin
e. Diclofenac sodium
2845. What nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug is indicated for treatment of the patient's rheumatoid arthritis, if this patient has a history of peptic ulcer disease of the stomach?
a. Indomethacin
b. Acetylsalicylic acid
c. Ibuprofen
d. Diclofenac sodium
*e. Celecoxib
2846. What nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug is the most hematotoxic and can cause agranulocytosis?
a. Ibuprofen
*b. Metamizole sodium
c. Acetylsalicylic acid
d. Indomethacin
e. Nimesulide
2847. What nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug is the most hematotoxic and can cause agranulocytosis?
a. Ibuprofen
*b. Metamizole sodium
c. Nimesulide
d. Indomethacin
e. Acetylsalicylic acid
2848. What nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug is the most hematotoxic and can cause agranulocytosis?
a. Nimesulide
b. Ibuprofen
c. Indomethacin
*d. Metamizole sodium
e. Acetylsalicylic acid
2849. What oral hypoglycemic agent should be prescribed for a 47-year-old overweight patient with type 2 diabetes mellitus, if diet therapy is ineffective?
*a. Metformin
b. Metoclopramide
c. Meloxicam
d. Metoprolol
e. Metronidazole
2850. What oral hypoglycemic agent should be prescribed for a 47-year-old overweight patient with type 2 diabetes mellitus, if diet therapy is ineffective?
a. Metoclopramide
b. Meloxicam
c. Metronidazole
*d. Metformin
e. Metoprolol
2851. What oral hypoglycemic agent should be prescribed for a 47-year-old overweight patient with type 2 diabetes mellitus, if diet therapy is ineffective?
a. Metronidazole
b. Metoprolol
c. Metoclopramide
*d. Metformin
e. Meloxicam
2852. What packaging should the pharmacist use for a baby powder?
*a. Container with a lid that has holes in it
b. Parchment
c. Ordinary paper capsules
d. Gelatin capsules
e. Wax paper
2853. What packaging should the pharmacist use for a baby powder?
*a. Container with a lid that has holes in it
b. Wax paper
c. Ordinary paper capsules
d. Gelatin capsules
e. Parchment
2854. What packaging should the pharmacist use for a baby powder?
a. Parchment
*b. Container with a lid that has holes in it
c. Gelatin capsules
d. Ordinary paper capsules
e. Wax paper
2855. What parameter characterizes the ratio of the height of the powder in the matrix to the height of the obtained tablet?
*a. Compaction (compression) coefficient
b. Porosity
c. Compression value
d. Bulk volume
e. Flowability
2856. What parameter characterizes the ratio of the height of the powder in the matrix to the height of the obtained tablet?
a. Bulk volume
b. Flowability
c. Compression value
d. Porosity
*e. Compaction (compression) coefficient
2857. What parameter characterizes the ratio of the height of the powder in the matrix to the height of the obtained tablet?
a. Porosity
*b. Compaction (compression) coefficient
c. Bulk volume
d. Flowability
e. Compression value
2858. What parameter is measured using a drum friability tester during tablet quality control?
*a. Abrasion resistance
b. Disintegration
c. Impurities
d. Uniformity of dosage
e. Dissolution
2859. What parameter is measured using a drum friability tester during tablet quality control?
a. Impurities
b. Dissolution
c. Uniformity of dosage
*d. Abrasion resistance
e. Disintegration
2860. What parameter is measured using a drum friability tester during tablet quality control?
a. Uniformity of dosage
b. Dissolution
c. Disintegration
*d. Abrasion resistance
e. Impurities
2861. What pathological condition can develop during a long-term treatment with prednisolone?
*a. Gastrointestinal bleeding
b. Pyelonephritis
c. Salivation
d. Myocarditis
e. Pneumonia
2862. What pathological condition can develop during a long-term treatment with prednisolone?
*a. Gastrointestinal bleeding
b. Salivation
c. Pneumonia
d. Myocarditis
e. Pyelonephritis
2863. What pathological condition can develop during a long-term treatment with prednisolone?
a. Myocarditis
b. Pneumonia
c. Pyelonephritis
*d. Gastrointestinal bleeding
e. Salivation
2864. What pharmaceutical factor can affect therapeutic activity of active substances?
a. Drug dosing equipment
b. Material expences of the manufacture
c. WHO directives
*d. Adjuvants
e. Compliance with GMP regulations
2865. What pharmaceutical factor can affect therapeutic activity of active substances?
a. Material expences of the manufacture
b. Drug dosing equipment
*c. Adjuvants
d. WHO directives
e. Compliance with GMP regulations
2866. What pharmaceutical factor can affect therapeutic activity of active substances?
a. WHO directives
b. Drug dosing equipment
*c. Adjuvants
d. Material expences of the manufacture
e. Compliance with GMP regulations
2867. What pharmacological group of drugs textbfCANNOT be combined with expectorants?
*a. Antitussive drugs
b. Antibacterial drugs
c. Mucolytic agents
d. Polyvitamins
e. Decongestants
2868. What pharmacological group of drugs textbfCANNOT be combined with expectorants?
*a. Antitussive drugs
b. Polyvitamins
c. Mucolytic agents
d. Antibacterial drugs
e. Decongestants
2869. What pharmacological group of drugs textbfCANNOT be combined with expectorants?
a. Mucolytic agents
b. Antibacterial drugs
*c. Antitussive drugs
d. Polyvitamins
e. Decongestants
2870. What pharmacotherapeutic characteristic of a medicine allows its classification as over-the-counter drug?
*a. Medicine can cause no direct or indirect harm to the patient's health
b. Medicine contains substances that require additional research into their activity and side-effects
c. Medicine is available only for in-patient treatment
d. Medicine is available only by prescription
e. Medicine has entered the pharmaceutical market only resently and actual experience with its practical application is limited
2871. What pharmacotherapeutic characteristic of a medicine allows its classification as over-the-counter drug?
a. Medicine contains substances that require additional research into their activity and side-effects
b. Medicine has entered the pharmaceutical market only resently and actual experience with its practical application is limited
*c. Medicine can cause no direct or indirect harm to the patient's health
d. Medicine is available only for in-patient treatment
e. Medicine is available only by prescription
2872. What pharmacotherapeutic characteristic of a medicine allows its classification as over-the-counter drug?
a. Medicine has entered the pharmaceutical market only resently and actual experience with its practical application is limited
b. Medicine contains substances that require additional research into their activity and side-effects
c. Medicine is available only for in-patient treatment
*d. Medicine can cause no direct or indirect harm to the patient's health
e. Medicine is available only by prescription
2873. What pharmacy department carries out the individual production of extemporaneous medicines, their quality control, and their dispensing to consumers?
*a. Prescription and production
b. Stock of goods
c. Over-the-counter sales
d. Ready-made dosage forms
e. Medical cosmetics
2874. What pharmacy department carries out the individual production of extemporaneous medicines, their quality control, and their dispensing to consumers?
a. Ready-made dosage forms
b. Medical cosmetics
*c. Prescription and production
d. Stock of goods
e. Over-the-counter sales
2875. What pharmacy department carries out the individual production of extemporaneous medicines, their quality control, and their dispensing to consumers?
a. Stock of goods
b. Medical cosmetics
*c. Prescription and production
d. Ready-made dosage forms
e. Over-the-counter sales
2876. What preparation has an antacid effect?
a. Famotidine
b. Pirenzepine
*c. Aluminum phosphate
d. Omeprazole
e. Ranitidine
2877. What preparation has an antacid effect?
a. Famotidine
b. Ranitidine
*c. Aluminum phosphate
d. Pirenzepine
e. Omeprazole
2878. What preparation has an antacid effect?
a. Pirenzepine
*b. Aluminum phosphate
c. Omeprazole
d. Ranitidine
e. Famotidine
2879. What preparation has an antiemetic effect?
*a. Metoclopramide
b. Clarithromycin
c. Aluminum phosphate
d. Loperamide
e. Sodium bicarbonate
2880. What preparation has an antiemetic effect?
a. Aluminum phosphate
*b. Metoclopramide
c. Loperamide
d. Sodium bicarbonate
e. Clarithromycin
2881. What preparation has an antiemetic effect?
a. Sodium bicarbonate
b. Aluminum phosphate
c. Loperamide
*d. Metoclopramide
e. Clarithromycin
2882. What prescription form is used to prescribe psychotropic drugs in their pure form or in a mixture with indifferent substances for the dispensation free of charge or at a discount?
a. Two copies of prescription form f-3
*b. Two prescription forms f-1 and f-3
c. Prescription form f-1
d. Prescription form f-3
e. Two copies of prescription form f-1
2883. What prescription form is used to prescribe psychotropic drugs in their pure form or in a mixture with indifferent substances for the dispensation free of charge or at a discount?
a. Two copies of prescription form f-3
*b. Two prescription forms f-1 and f-3
c. Prescription form f-3
d. Two copies of prescription form f-1
e. Prescription form f-1
2884. What prescription form is used to prescribe psychotropic drugs in their pure form or in a mixture with indifferent substances for the dispensation free of charge or at a discount?
a. Two copies of prescription form f-3
b. Two copies of prescription form f-1
c. Prescription form f-3
d. Prescription form f-1
*e. Two prescription forms f-1 and f-3
2885. What preservative did the pharmacist use to ensure the stability of eye drops?
*a. Boric acid
b. Polyvinyl alcohol
c. Hydrochloric acid
d. Methyl cellulose
e. Sodium chloride
2886. What preservative did the pharmacist use to ensure the stability of eye drops?
a. Methyl cellulose
*b. Boric acid
c. Sodium chloride
d. Hydrochloric acid
e. Polyvinyl alcohol
2887. What preservative did the pharmacist use to ensure the stability of eye drops?
a. Polyvinyl alcohol
*b. Boric acid
c. Sodium chloride
d. Methyl cellulose
e. Hydrochloric acid
2888. What pricing policy is used by the management of a pharmacy, if during the price formation for pharmaceutical products the main focus is the prices offered by the nearest pharmacies, rather than pharmacy's own expences or demand for the products?
*a. Competition-based pricing
b. Breakeven pricing
c. Cost-based pricing
d. Tender pricing
e. Demand-based pricing
2889. What pricing policy is used by the management of a pharmacy, if during the price formation for pharmaceutical products the main focus is the prices offered by the nearest pharmacies, rather than pharmacy's own expences or demand for the products?
a. Demand-based pricing
b. Breakeven pricing
*c. Competition-based pricing
d. Cost-based pricing
e. Tender pricing
2890. What pricing policy is used by the management of a pharmacy, if during the price formation for pharmaceutical products the main focus is the prices offered by the nearest pharmacies, rather than pharmacy's own expences or demand for the products?
a. Tender pricing
b. Demand-based pricing
c. Breakeven pricing
*d. Competition-based pricing
e. Cost-based pricing
2891. What property of the tablet mass determines the most how fast a matrix hole of the tablet press machine is filled?
*a. Fluidity (flowability)
b. Relative density
c. Humidity
d. Porosity
e. Bulk density
2892. What property of the tablet mass determines the most how fast a matrix hole of the tablet press machine is filled?
a. Bulk density
*b. Fluidity (flowability)
c. Porosity
d. Humidity
e. Relative density
2893. What property of the tablet mass determines the most how fast a matrix hole of the tablet press machine is filled?
a. Humidity
b. Porosity
c. Bulk density
*d. Fluidity (flowability)
e. Relative density
2894. What qualitative reaction proves the presence of anthracene-derived compounds in a herbal raw material?
a. Reaction with Fehling's reagent
*b. Reaction with an alkali
c. Reaction with iron sulfate
d. Reaction with Dragendorff's reagent
e. Reaction with ammonium iron(III) sulfate
2895. What qualitative reaction proves the presence of anthracene-derived compounds in a herbal raw material?
a. Reaction with Fehling's reagent
b. Reaction with Dragendorff's reagent
*c. Reaction with an alkali
d. Reaction with ammonium iron(III) sulfate
e. Reaction with iron sulfate
2896. What qualitative reaction proves the presence of anthracene-derived compounds in a herbal raw material?
a. Reaction with iron sulfate
b. Reaction with Fehling's reagent
c. Reaction with Dragendorff's reagent
*d. Reaction with an alkali
e. Reaction with ammonium iron(III) sulfate
2897. What quality indicator is subject to additional control during the production of eye drops in the form of suspensions?
*a. Particle size
b. Dry residue
c. Acid value and peroxide value
d. Purification methods
e. Moisture content
2898. What quality indicator is subject to additional control during the production of eye drops in the form of suspensions?
a. Acid value and peroxide value
b. Moisture content
c. Purification methods
*d. Particle size
e. Dry residue
2899. What quality indicator is subject to additional control during the production of eye drops in the form of suspensions?
a. Dry residue
b. Acid value and peroxide value
c. Moisture content
*d. Particle size
e. Purification methods
2900. What quality parameter must be additionally controlled during the industrial production of suspension eye drops?
a. Color
b. Quantitative determination
c. Transparency
d. Sterility
*e. Particle size
2901. What quality parameter must be additionally controlled during the industrial production of suspension eye drops?
a. Quantitative determination
b. Color
c. Transparency
d. Sterility
*e. Particle size
2902. What quality parameter must be additionally controlled during the industrial production of suspension eye drops?
a. Quantitative determination
b. Transparency
*c. Particle size
d. Color
e. Sterility
2903. What quantification method must be used for the analysis of isoniazid substance, according to the regulations of the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine?
a. Acidimetry in a non-aqueous medium
b. Alkalimetry
c. Photocolorimetry
*d. Bromatometry
e. Nitritometry after alkaline hydrolysis
2904. What quantification method must be used for the analysis of isoniazid substance, according to the regulations of the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine?
a. Acidimetry in a non-aqueous medium
b. Photocolorimetry
*c. Bromatometry
d. Alkalimetry
e. Nitritometry after alkaline hydrolysis
2905. What quantification method must be used for the analysis of isoniazid substance, according to the regulations of the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine?
a. Alkalimetry
*b. Bromatometry
c. Photocolorimetry
d. Acidimetry in a non-aqueous medium
e. Nitritometry after alkaline hydrolysis
2906. What reagent can confirm that alanine is an alpha-amino acid?
a. Saturated sodium bicarbonate  solution
*b. Ninhydrin solution
c. Sulfuric acid solution
d. Sulfosalicylic acid solution
e. Barium hydroxide solution
2907. What reagent can confirm that alanine is an alpha-amino acid?
a. Sulfuric acid solution
b. Sulfosalicylic acid solution
*c. Ninhydrin solution
d. Barium hydroxide solution
e. Saturated sodium bicarbonate  solution
2908. What reagent can confirm that alanine is an alpha-amino acid?
a. Sulfuric acid solution
b. Sulfosalicylic acid solution
c. Saturated sodium bicarbonate  solution
*d. Ninhydrin solution
e. Barium hydroxide solution
2909. What reagent is used to identify sodium sulfate?
a. Cobalt chloride
*b. Barium chloride
c. Iron(III) chloride
d. Calcium chloride
e. Silver nitrate
2910. What reagent is used to identify sodium sulfate?
a. Cobalt chloride
b. Silver nitrate
c. Calcium chloride
*d. Barium chloride
e. Iron(III) chloride
2911. What reagent should be used by a dispensing chemist-analyst in a reaction for pyridine ring identification?
*a. Cyanogen bromide reagent
b. Hydrochloric acid
c. Cobalt nitrate solution
d. Chromotropic acid disodium salt
e. Silver nitrate solution
2912. What reagent should be used by a dispensing chemist-analyst in a reaction for pyridine ring identification?
a. Hydrochloric acid
b. Cobalt nitrate solution
c. Chromotropic acid disodium salt
*d. Cyanogen bromide reagent
e. Silver nitrate solution
2913. What reagent should be used by a dispensing chemist-analyst in a reaction for pyridine ring identification?
a. Silver nitrate solution
b. Cobalt nitrate solution
c. Hydrochloric acid
*d. Cyanogen bromide reagent
e. Chromotropic acid disodium salt
2914. What semi-synthetic antibiotic can be synthesized in the process of reaction between 6-aminopenicillanic acid and phenylaminoacetic acid chloranhydride?
*a. Ampicillin
b. Rifampicin
c. Amikacin
d. Cephalexin
e. Methacycline
2915. What semi-synthetic antibiotic can be synthesized in the process of reaction between 6-aminopenicillanic acid and phenylaminoacetic acid chloranhydride?
a. Methacycline
b. Amikacin
c. Rifampicin
d. Cephalexin
*e. Ampicillin
2916. What semi-synthetic antibiotic can be synthesized in the process of reaction between 6-aminopenicillanic acid and phenylaminoacetic acid chloranhydride?
a. Rifampicin
b. Amikacin
c. Methacycline
*d. Ampicillin
e. Cephalexin
2917. What should be the disintegration time for effervescent tablets according to the requirements of the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine?
*a. 5 minutes
b. 3 minutes
c. 60 minutes
d. 15 minutes
e. 30 minutes
2918. What should be the disintegration time for effervescent tablets according to the requirements of the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine?
*a. 5 minutes
b. 60 minutes
c. 3 minutes
d. 30 minutes
e. 15 minutes
2919. What should be the disintegration time for effervescent tablets according to the requirements of the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine?
a. 15 minutes
b. 3 minutes
c. 60 minutes
d. 30 minutes
*e. 5 minutes
2920. What should be used by a dispensing chemist-analyst for identification of bismuth-containing medicinal substances?
*a. Thiourea solution
b. Iron(III) sulfate solution
c. Cobalt nitrate solution
d. Potassium permanganate solution
e. Beta-naphthol solution
2921. What should be used by a dispensing chemist-analyst for identification of bismuth-containing medicinal substances?
a. Cobalt nitrate solution
b. Iron(III) sulfate solution
*c. Thiourea solution
d. Beta-naphthol solution
e. Potassium permanganate solution
2922. What should be used by a dispensing chemist-analyst for identification of bismuth-containing medicinal substances?
a. Potassium permanganate solution
b. Cobalt nitrate solution
*c. Thiourea solution
d. Iron(III) sulfate solution
e. Beta-naphthol solution
2923. What should be used by an analytical chemist in the pharmacopoeial analysis of medicinal subsatnces that contain iron(III)?
a. Potassium permanganate solution
b. Sodium nitrite solution
*c. Potassium thiocyanate solution
d. Ammonia solution
e. Ammonium chloride solution
2924. What should be used by an analytical chemist in the pharmacopoeial analysis of medicinal subsatnces that contain iron(III)?
a. Sodium nitrite solution
b. Ammonia solution
*c. Potassium thiocyanate solution
d. Potassium permanganate solution
e. Ammonium chloride solution
2925. What should be used by an analytical chemist in the pharmacopoeial analysis of medicinal subsatnces that contain iron(III)?
a. Sodium nitrite solution
b. Ammonia solution
c. Potassium permanganate solution
*d. Potassium thiocyanate solution
e. Ammonium chloride solution
2926. What side effect is observed in cases of long-term use of digoxin?
*a. Bradycardia
b. Hypertension
c. Hypokalemia
d. Constipation
e. Hypotension
2927. What side effect is observed in cases of long-term use of digoxin?
a. Constipation
b. Hypertension
*c. Bradycardia
d. Hypotension
e. Hypokalemia
2928. What side effect is observed in cases of long-term use of digoxin?
a. Hypertension
b. Hypotension
*c. Bradycardia
d. Constipation
e. Hypokalemia
2929. What solution should be used by an expert at the laboratory of the pharmaceutical product certification center to identify the medicines that contain potassium ions?
*a. Sodium cobaltinitrite
b. Magnesium sulfate
c. Barium chloride
d. Sodium hydroxide
e. Ammonium oxalate
2930. What solution should be used by an expert at the laboratory of the pharmaceutical product certification center to identify the medicines that contain potassium ions?
a. Ammonium oxalate
*b. Sodium cobaltinitrite
c. Sodium hydroxide
d. Magnesium sulfate
e. Barium chloride
2931. What solution should be used by an expert at the laboratory of the pharmaceutical product certification center to identify the medicines that contain potassium ions?
a. Magnesium sulfate
b. Barium chloride
*c. Sodium cobaltinitrite
d. Sodium hydroxide
e. Ammonium oxalate
2932. What stabilizer is used to stabilize ascorbic acid solutions for injections?
*a. Sodium bicarbonate with sodium sulfite
b. Sodium thiosulfate
c. Weibel stabilizer
d. 0.1 M hydrochloric acid solution
e. 0.1 M sodium hydroxide solution
2933. What stabilizer is used to stabilize ascorbic acid solutions for injections?
a. 0.1 M sodium hydroxide solution
b. Sodium thiosulfate
c. 0.1 M hydrochloric acid solution
*d. Sodium bicarbonate with sodium sulfite
e. Weibel stabilizer
2934. What stabilizer is used to stabilize ascorbic acid solutions for injections?
a. Weibel stabilizer
b. 0.1 M hydrochloric acid solution
c. 0.1 M sodium hydroxide solution
*d. Sodium bicarbonate with sodium sulfite
e. Sodium thiosulfate
2935. What stabilizer must the pharmacist add, when preparing an atropine sulfate solution for injections?
a. Sodium bicarbonate
b. Sodium hydroxide
c. Ascorbic acid
*d. Hydrochloric acid
e. Sodium metabisulfite
2936. What stabilizer must the pharmacist add, when preparing an atropine sulfate solution for injections?
a. Sodium metabisulfite
*b. Hydrochloric acid
c. Sodium hydroxide
d. Sodium bicarbonate
e. Ascorbic acid
2937. What stabilizer must the pharmacist add, when preparing an atropine sulfate solution for injections?
a. Sodium metabisulfite
b. Sodium hydroxide
*c. Hydrochloric acid
d. Ascorbic acid
e. Sodium bicarbonate
2938. What structure is authorized to issue permits for individual or collective provision of audit services in Ukraine?
a. The State Service of Ukraine for  Medicines
*b. The Audit Chamber of Ukraine
c. The State Service of Ukraine for Drug Control
d. The Control and Revision Office
e. The State Regulatory Service of  Ukraine
2939. What structure is authorized to issue permits for individual or collective provision of audit services in Ukraine?
a. The State Service of Ukraine for  Medicines
b. The Control and Revision Office
*c. The Audit Chamber of Ukraine
d. The State Service of Ukraine for Drug Control
e. The State Regulatory Service of  Ukraine
2940. What structure is authorized to issue permits for individual or collective provision of audit services in Ukraine?
a. The State Service of Ukraine for Drug Control
*b. The Audit Chamber of Ukraine
c. The Control and Revision Office
d. The State Regulatory Service of  Ukraine
e. The State Service of Ukraine for  Medicines
2941. What substance can be determined using the Beilstein test during rapid analysis of drugs?
a. Fluoride
b. Nitrogen
c. Oxygen
*d. Chlorine
e. Hydrogen
2942. What substance can be determined using the Beilstein test during rapid analysis of drugs?
a. Hydrogen
b. Nitrogen
c. Fluoride
*d. Chlorine
e. Oxygen
2943. What substance can be determined using the Beilstein test during rapid analysis of drugs?
a. Oxygen
*b. Chlorine
c. Fluoride
d. Hydrogen
e. Nitrogen
2944. What substance can be synthesized as a result of the condensation of 5-nitrofurfural with semicarbazide?
a. Metronidazole
*b. Nitrofural (Nitrofurazone)
c. Nitroxoline
d. Phthalazole (Phthalylsulfathiazole)
e. Norfloxacin
2945. What substance can be synthesized as a result of the condensation of 5-nitrofurfural with semicarbazide?
a. Nitroxoline
b. Phthalazole (Phthalylsulfathiazole)
*c. Nitrofural (Nitrofurazone)
d. Norfloxacin
e. Metronidazole
2946. What substance can be synthesized as a result of the condensation of 5-nitrofurfural with semicarbazide?
a. Phthalazole (Phthalylsulfathiazole)
b. Metronidazole
c. Norfloxacin
*d. Nitrofural (Nitrofurazone)
e. Nitroxoline
2947. What substance forms a film coating of tablets and can be dissolved only in intestinal juice?
*a. Acetylphthalylcellulose
b. Diethylaminomethylcellulose
c. Sodium carboxymethyl cellulose
d. Benzylaminocellulose
e. Paraaminobenzoate of sugars
2948. What substance forms a film coating of tablets and can be dissolved only in intestinal juice?
*a. Acetylphthalylcellulose
b. Sodium carboxymethyl cellulose
c. Diethylaminomethylcellulose
d. Paraaminobenzoate of sugars
e. Benzylaminocellulose
2949. What substance forms a film coating of tablets and can be dissolved only in intestinal juice?
a. Sodium carboxymethyl cellulose
b. Benzylaminocellulose
c. Diethylaminomethylcellulose
*d. Acetylphthalylcellulose
e. Paraaminobenzoate of sugars
2950. What substance is a component of the powders enclosed in gelatin capsules?
*a. Ethacridine lactate
b. Magnesium oxide
c. Glucose
d. Dimedrol (Diphenhydramine)
e. Streptocide (Sulfanilamide)
2951. What substance is a component of the powders enclosed in gelatin capsules?
a. Dimedrol (Diphenhydramine)
b. Streptocide (Sulfanilamide)
c. Magnesium oxide
d. Glucose
*e. Ethacridine lactate
2952. What substance is a component of the powders enclosed in gelatin capsules?
a. Magnesium oxide
b. Streptocide (Sulfanilamide)
*c. Ethacridine lactate
d. Dimedrol (Diphenhydramine)
e. Glucose
2953. What substance is most often used as a vehicle in triturations?
*a. Lactose
b. Glucose
c. Talcum
d. Starch
e. Sucrose
2954. What substance is most often used as a vehicle in triturations?
*a. Lactose
b. Starch
c. Sucrose
d. Glucose
e. Talcum
2955. What substance is most often used as a vehicle in triturations?
a. Starch
b. Glucose
c. Sucrose
*d. Lactose
e. Talcum
2956. What substances are used as leaveners in <<effervescent>> tablets?
*a. Mixtures of sodium bicarbonate with tartaric or citric acid
b. Aerosil (fumed silica), polysorbate 80
c. Agar agar, alginic acid
d. Starch, alginic acid
e. Sodium bicarbonate, agar agar
2957. What substances are used as leaveners in <<effervescent>> tablets?
a. Aerosil (fumed silica), polysorbate 80
*b. Mixtures of sodium bicarbonate with tartaric or citric acid
c. Agar agar, alginic acid
d. Sodium bicarbonate, agar agar
e. Starch, alginic acid
2958. What substances are used as leaveners in <<effervescent>> tablets?
a. Aerosil (fumed silica), polysorbate 80
b. Agar agar, alginic acid
c. Sodium bicarbonate, agar agar
d. Starch, alginic acid
*e. Mixtures of sodium bicarbonate with tartaric or citric acid
2959. What tablet coating protects stomach from harmful influence of active ingredients?
a. -
b. Gastrically absorbed
c. Fat-soluble
*d. Intestinally absorbed
e. Water-soluble
2960. What tablet coating protects stomach from harmful influence of active ingredients?
a. Fat-soluble
b. -
c. Gastrically absorbed
d. Water-soluble
*e. Intestinally absorbed
2961. What tablet coating protects stomach from harmful influence of active ingredients?
a. Gastrically absorbed
b. Water-soluble
c. -
*d. Intestinally absorbed
e. Fat-soluble
2962. What technological method is used to prepare powders with dyes?
a. Mixing in ascending order, from smaller to larger volume
*b. The principle of <<three layers>>
c. Mixing in descending order, from larger to smaller volume
d. The dye is added last, after the mixture is prepared
e. Preliminary sifting
2963. What technological method is used to prepare powders with dyes?
a. Preliminary sifting
b. Mixing in ascending order, from smaller to larger volume
c. Mixing in descending order, from larger to smaller volume
*d. The principle of <<three layers>>
e. The dye is added last, after the mixture is prepared
2964. What technological method is used to prepare powders with dyes?
a. The dye is added last, after the mixture is prepared
b. Preliminary sifting
*c. The principle of <<three layers>>
d. Mixing in ascending order, from smaller to larger volume
e. Mixing in descending order, from larger to smaller volume
2965. What technology should be chosen by a pharmacist to make a liquid dosage form, if it contains calcium gluconate?
a. Dissolve in alkaline medium
*b. Dissolve it in hot solvent or heat it up to full dissolution
c. Add equal amount of sodium chloride
d. Dissolve in the water free of redox subsatances
e. First grind it into powder when it is dry or with small amount of solvent added
2966. What technology should be chosen by a pharmacist to make a liquid dosage form, if it contains calcium gluconate?
a. Dissolve in the water free of redox subsatances
b. First grind it into powder when it is dry or with small amount of solvent added
c. Dissolve in alkaline medium
d. Add equal amount of sodium chloride
*e. Dissolve it in hot solvent or heat it up to full dissolution
2967. What technology should be chosen by a pharmacist to make a liquid dosage form, if it contains calcium gluconate?
a. First grind it into powder when it is dry or with small amount of solvent added
b. Dissolve in alkaline medium
*c. Dissolve it in hot solvent or heat it up to full dissolution
d. Dissolve in the water free of redox subsatances
e. Add equal amount of sodium chloride
2968. What technology was used by a pharmacist to make a starch solution?
*a. Mixed it with cold water, than poured the mixture into boiling water and boiled for 1-2 minutes
b. Mixed it with hot water and added cold water
c. Dissolved it in a vial for dispensing in freshly-distilled filtered purified water
d. Dissolved it in cold water and heated
e. Dissolved it in boiling water
2969. What technology was used by a pharmacist to make a starch solution?
a. Dissolved it in boiling water
*b. Mixed it with cold water, than poured the mixture into boiling water and boiled for 1-2 minutes
c. Dissolved it in a vial for dispensing in freshly-distilled filtered purified water
d. Mixed it with hot water and added cold water
e. Dissolved it in cold water and heated
2970. What technology was used by a pharmacist to make a starch solution?
a. Dissolved it in cold water and heated
b. Dissolved it in boiling water
*c. Mixed it with cold water, than poured the mixture into boiling water and boiled for 1-2 minutes
d. Dissolved it in a vial for dispensing in freshly-distilled filtered purified water
e. Mixed it with hot water and added cold water
2971. What tincture is industrially manufactured at the ratio of 1:2?
a. Atropa belladonna
b. Hypericum
c. Mentha
d. Leonurus
*e. Styphnolobium japonicum
2972. What tincture is industrially manufactured at the ratio of 1:2?
a. Leonurus
b. Atropa belladonna
*c. Styphnolobium japonicum
d. Hypericum
e. Mentha
2973. What tincture is industrially manufactured at the ratio of 1:2?
a. Mentha
b. Leonurus
c. Hypericum
d. Atropa belladonna
*e. Styphnolobium japonicum
2974. What topical antiviral agent should be recommended to the patient with herpetic lesions on the lips?
a. Aflubin
b. Arbidol (Umifenovir)
*c. Acyclovir
d. Anaferon
e. Amizon (Enisamium iodide)
2975. What topical antiviral agent should be recommended to the patient with herpetic lesions on the lips?
a. Amizon (Enisamium iodide)
*b. Acyclovir
c. Anaferon
d. Arbidol (Umifenovir)
e. Aflubin
2976. What topical antiviral agent should be recommended to the patient with herpetic lesions on the lips?
a. Anaferon
*b. Acyclovir
c. Aflubin
d. Amizon (Enisamium iodide)
e. Arbidol (Umifenovir)
2977. What type of loan does the pharmacy receive in the form of goods, and returns mainly in monetary form?
*a. Commercial loan
b. Bank loan
c. Prolonged loan
d. Term loan
e. State loan
2978. What type of loan does the pharmacy receive in the form of goods, and returns mainly in monetary form?
*a. Commercial loan
b. State loan
c. Term loan
d. Bank loan
e. Prolonged loan
2979. What type of loan does the pharmacy receive in the form of goods, and returns mainly in monetary form?
a. Bank loan
b. Prolonged loan
*c. Commercial loan
d. Term loan
e. State loan
2980. What type of marketing should be used by a pharmaceutical company in a situation, when the demand for medicines declines?
a. Conversion marketing
b. Stimulational marketing
c. Evolving marketing
*d. Remarketing
e. Synchromarketing
2981. What type of marketing should be used by a pharmaceutical company in a situation, when the demand for medicines declines?
a. Evolving marketing
b. Stimulational marketing
c. Synchromarketing
*d. Remarketing
e. Conversion marketing
2982. What type of marketing should be used by a pharmaceutical company in a situation, when the demand for medicines declines?
a. Stimulational marketing
b. Synchromarketing
c. Conversion marketing
d. Evolving marketing
*e. Remarketing
2983. What type of marketing should be used if the demand for some medicines in the pharmaceutical market is negative?
*a. Conversion marketing
b. Synchromarketing
c. Incentive marketing
d. Demarketing
e. Remarketing
2984. What type of marketing should be used if the demand for some medicines in the pharmaceutical market is negative?
a. Demarketing
*b. Conversion marketing
c. Synchromarketing
d. Remarketing
e. Incentive marketing
2985. What type of marketing should be used if the demand for some medicines in the pharmaceutical market is negative?
a. Synchromarketing
b. Remarketing
c. Demarketing
d. Incentive marketing
*e. Conversion marketing
2986. What type of moisture remains after the herbal raw material is dried?
a. External
b. Free
*c. Residual
d. Equilibrium
e. Osmotic
2987. What type of moisture remains after the herbal raw material is dried?
a. Free
*b. Residual
c. Osmotic
d. Equilibrium
e. External
2988. What type of moisture remains after the herbal raw material is dried?
a. Free
b. External
c. Osmotic
*d. Residual
e. Equilibrium
2989. What type of tax is the Individual Income Tax?
a. Nationwide, indirect
*b. Nationwide, direct
c. Local, direct
d. Local, indirect
e. Special
2990. What type of tax is the Individual Income Tax?
a. Nationwide, indirect
b. Special
c. Local, direct
*d. Nationwide, direct
e. Local, indirect
2991. What type of tax is the Individual Income Tax?
a. Special
b. Local, indirect
c. Nationwide, indirect
d. Local, direct
*e. Nationwide, direct
2992. What variable of the internal environment of the ''Provisor'' pharmacy can be described as the ways of transformation of component materials (medicinal agents "an gross") into end product (various dosage forms)?
*a. Technologies
b. Mission
c. Human resources
d. Structure
e. Tasks
2993. What variable of the internal environment of the ''Provisor'' pharmacy can be described as the ways of transformation of component materials (medicinal agents "an gross") into end product (various dosage forms)?
a. Tasks
b. Human resources
*c. Technologies
d. Mission
e. Structure
2994. What variable of the internal environment of the ''Provisor'' pharmacy can be described as the ways of transformation of component materials (medicinal agents "an gross") into end product (various dosage forms)?
a. Tasks
b. Mission
*c. Technologies
d. Structure
e. Human resources
2995. When a pharmacy restocks its medical products, the incoming products must undergo quality assessment. Who conducts the assessment in this case?
a. A financially accountable person
*b. An authorized person
c. A pharmacist
d. The head manager of the pharmacy
e. A representative of the laboratory
2996. When a pharmacy restocks its medical products, the incoming products must undergo quality assessment. Who conducts the assessment in this case?
a. The head manager of the pharmacy
b. A pharmacist
*c. An authorized person
d. A financially accountable person
e. A representative of the laboratory
2997. When a pharmacy restocks its medical products, the incoming products must undergo quality assessment. Who conducts the assessment in this case?
a. The head manager of the pharmacy
b. A representative of the laboratory
c. A financially accountable person
*d. An authorized person
e. A pharmacist
2998. When activated charcoal is included into the combined therapy, the sorption of other medicines:
a. Accelerates
b. Activates
*c. Decreases
d. Remains unchanged
e. Increases
2999. When activated charcoal is included into the combined therapy, the sorption of other medicines:
a. Activates
b. Increases
*c. Decreases
d. Remains unchanged
e. Accelerates
3000. When activated charcoal is included into the combined therapy, the sorption of other medicines:
a. Increases
b. Activates
*c. Decreases
d. Accelerates
e. Remains unchanged
3001. When an extractant is filtered through a herbal raw material to obtain an extract of the substances soluble in this extractant, this process is called:
*a. Percolation
b. Remaceration
c. Steeping
d. Turbo extraction
e. Maceration
3002. When an extractant is filtered through a herbal raw material to obtain an extract of the substances soluble in this extractant, this process is called:
a. Remaceration
b. Maceration
c. Turbo extraction
d. Steeping
*e. Percolation
3003. When an extractant is filtered through a herbal raw material to obtain an extract of the substances soluble in this extractant, this process is called:
a. Steeping
*b. Percolation
c. Maceration
d. Remaceration
e. Turbo extraction
3004. When analyzing the activity of the pharmacy, the pharmacy's head manager performed the following calculations: the manager subtracted the cost price of the sold goods from the proceeds from the sales of goods at retail prices. What indicator was calculated by the pharmacy's head manager?
*a. Markups
b. Profitability
c. Expenses
d. Commodity circulation
e. Profit
3005. When analyzing the activity of the pharmacy, the pharmacy's head manager performed the following calculations: the manager subtracted the cost price of the sold goods from the proceeds from the sales of goods at retail prices. What indicator was calculated by the pharmacy's head manager?
a. Expenses
*b. Markups
c. Commodity circulation
d. Profitability
e. Profit
3006. When analyzing the activity of the pharmacy, the pharmacy's head manager performed the following calculations: the manager subtracted the cost price of the sold goods from the proceeds from the sales of goods at retail prices. What indicator was calculated by the pharmacy's head manager?
a. Profit
*b. Markups
c. Expenses
d. Profitability
e. Commodity circulation
3007. When developing a new medicine, marketologists of the pharmaceutical company have conducted an isolated research to determine the doctors' opinion of the medicines currently available on the market. What method of marketing research was used?
a. Panel
b. Observation
*c. Survey
d. Experiment
e. Testing
3008. When developing a new medicine, marketologists of the pharmaceutical company have conducted an isolated research to determine the doctors' opinion of the medicines currently available on the market. What method of marketing research was used?
a. Testing
b. Observation
*c. Survey
d. Experiment
e. Panel
3009. When developing a new medicine, marketologists of the pharmaceutical company have conducted an isolated research to determine the doctors' opinion of the medicines currently available on the market. What method of marketing research was used?
a. Testing
b. Observation
c. Experiment
*d. Survey
e. Panel
3010. When dispensing an antacid and ofloxacin in tablets, the dispensing chemist warned the customer that these drugs should be taken separately with 2-hour interval in between. Simultaneous taking of both drugs:
a. Decreases antacid effectiveness
b. Increases antacid effectiveness
*c. Decreases ofloxacin absorption
d. Increases risk of dysbiosis
e. Increases ofloxacin absorption
3011. When dispensing an antacid and ofloxacin in tablets, the dispensing chemist warned the customer that these drugs should be taken separately with 2-hour interval in between. Simultaneous taking of both drugs:
a. Increases ofloxacin absorption
b. Increases risk of dysbiosis
c. Decreases antacid effectiveness
d. Increases antacid effectiveness
*e. Decreases ofloxacin absorption
3012. When dispensing an antacid and ofloxacin in tablets, the dispensing chemist warned the customer that these drugs should be taken separately with 2-hour interval in between. Simultaneous taking of both drugs:
a. Increases risk of dysbiosis
b. Increases ofloxacin absorption
*c. Decreases ofloxacin absorption
d. Increases antacid effectiveness
e. Decreases antacid effectiveness
3013. When dispensing an iron supplement to be taken orally, the pharmacist must warn the patient that this preparation should not be taken with milk or dairy products. What might happen otherwise, if the patient is not warned?
a. Faster absorption of the drug
b. Prolongation of the effect of iron preparations
*c. Formation of poorly soluble chelate complexes
d. Accelerated elimination of the drug
e. Increased activity of the drug
3014. When dispensing an iron supplement to be taken orally, the pharmacist must warn the patient that this preparation should not be taken with milk or dairy products. What might happen otherwise, if the patient is not warned?
a. Increased activity of the drug
b. Accelerated elimination of the drug
*c. Formation of poorly soluble chelate complexes
d. Faster absorption of the drug
e. Prolongation of the effect of iron preparations
3015. When dispensing an iron supplement to be taken orally, the pharmacist must warn the patient that this preparation should not be taken with milk or dairy products. What might happen otherwise, if the patient is not warned?
a. Prolongation of the effect of iron preparations
b. Increased activity of the drug
c. Faster absorption of the drug
*d. Formation of poorly soluble chelate complexes
e. Accelerated elimination of the drug
3016. When examining a substance with an ester group, you can conduct a reaction that produces:
a. Azo dye
b. Berlin blue
c. Diazonium salt
*d. Iron(III) hydroxamate
e. Indophenol
3017. When examining a substance with an ester group, you can conduct a reaction that produces:
a. Indophenol
*b. Iron(III) hydroxamate
c. Diazonium salt
d. Berlin blue
e. Azo dye
3018. When examining a substance with an ester group, you can conduct a reaction that produces:
a. Indophenol
b. Azo dye
c. Berlin blue
d. Diazonium salt
*e. Iron(III) hydroxamate
3019. When is it necessary to renew the agreement on collective (team) material responsibility?
a. When 30% of employees from the original team leave the team
*b. When 50% of employees from the original team leave the team
c. When 25% of employees from the original team leave the team
d. Whenever a new employee joins the team
e. Whenever an employee leaves the team
3020. When is it necessary to renew the agreement on collective (team) material responsibility?
a. Whenever a new employee joins the team
b. Whenever an employee leaves the team
c. When 30% of employees from the original team leave the team
*d. When 50% of employees from the original team leave the team
e. When 25% of employees from the original team leave the team
3021. When is it necessary to renew the agreement on collective (team) material responsibility?
a. Whenever an employee leaves the team
b. When 30% of employees from the original team leave the team
c. When 25% of employees from the original team leave the team
*d. When 50% of employees from the original team leave the team
e. Whenever a new employee joins the team
3022. When making ampoules, certain admixtures are introduced into the glass to change its properties. Why is boron oxide added into the glass?
*a. To improve its chemical resistance
b. To lower its melting temperature
c. To increase its mechanical strength
d. To increase its thermal resistance
e. To change its color
3023. When making ampoules, certain admixtures are introduced into the glass to change its properties. Why is boron oxide added into the glass?
a. To increase its thermal resistance
b. To change its color
c. To lower its melting temperature
*d. To improve its chemical resistance
e. To increase its mechanical strength
3024. When making ampoules, certain admixtures are introduced into the glass to change its properties. Why is boron oxide added into the glass?
a. To lower its melting temperature
b. To increase its thermal resistance
*c. To improve its chemical resistance
d. To change its color
e. To increase its mechanical strength
3025. When obtaining individial substances, the choice of an extractant is determined mainly by its:
*a. Selectivity toward active substances
b. Pharmacological inertness
c. Cost
d. Anti-hydrolysis effect
e. Thermostability
3026. When obtaining individial substances, the choice of an extractant is determined mainly by its:
a. Cost
*b. Selectivity toward active substances
c. Anti-hydrolysis effect
d. Pharmacological inertness
e. Thermostability
3027. When obtaining individial substances, the choice of an extractant is determined mainly by its:
a. Cost
b. Thermostability
*c. Selectivity toward active substances
d. Anti-hydrolysis effect
e. Pharmacological inertness
3028. When preparing a solution, the pharmacist used an additional technique  -  grinding in a mortar with water. What substance typically requires this technique?
a. Boric acid
b. Silver nitrate
c. Furacilin (Nitrofural)
*d. Copper sulfate
e. Calcium gluconate
3029. When preparing a solution, the pharmacist used an additional technique  -  grinding in a mortar with water. What substance typically requires this technique?
a. Calcium gluconate
b. Silver nitrate
c. Boric acid
d. Furacilin (Nitrofural)
*e. Copper sulfate
3030. When preparing a solution, the pharmacist used an additional technique  -  grinding in a mortar with water. What substance typically requires this technique?
a. Furacilin (Nitrofural)
b. Boric acid
c. Silver nitrate
d. Calcium gluconate
*e. Copper sulfate
3031. When preparing compound powders, a pharmacist used the "three-layer" method. Which one of the listed substances is a dye?
a. Streptocide (Sulfanilamide)
b. Camphor
c. Sulfur
*d. Ethacridine lactate
e. Protargol
3032. When preparing compound powders, a pharmacist used the "three-layer" method. Which one of the listed substances is a dye?
a. Sulfur
b. Camphor
c. Protargol
*d. Ethacridine lactate
e. Streptocide (Sulfanilamide)
3033. When preparing compound powders, a pharmacist used the "three-layer" method. Which one of the listed substances is a dye?
a. Sulfur
b. Streptocide (Sulfanilamide)
*c. Ethacridine lactate
d. Camphor
e. Protargol
3034. When preparing dermatological ointments the following substance should be introduced by suspending:
a. Camphor
*b. Xeroform
c. Menthol
d. Ephedrine hydrochloride
e. Protargol (silver proteinate)
3035. When preparing dermatological ointments the following substance should be introduced by suspending:
a. Ephedrine hydrochloride
*b. Xeroform
c. Protargol (silver proteinate)
d. Menthol
e. Camphor
3036. When preparing dermatological ointments the following substance should be introduced by suspending:
a. Menthol
b. Ephedrine hydrochloride
c. Protargol (silver proteinate)
d. Camphor
*e. Xeroform
3037. When preparing suspensions, the medicinal substance is ground with a small amount of liquid. What is the optimal amount of liquid for comminution of 20 mg of zinc oxide according to the Deriagin's rule?
*a. 10 mL
b. 1 mL
c. 0.5 mL
d. 5 mL
e. 2 mL
3038. When preparing suspensions, the medicinal substance is ground with a small amount of liquid. What is the optimal amount of liquid for comminution of 20 mg of zinc oxide according to the Deriagin's rule?
a. 1 mL
*b. 10 mL
c. 2 mL
d. 0.5 mL
e. 5 mL
3039. When preparing suspensions, the medicinal substance is ground with a small amount of liquid. What is the optimal amount of liquid for comminution of 20 mg of zinc oxide according to the Deriagin's rule?
a. 2 mL
*b. 10 mL
c. 1 mL
d. 5 mL
e. 0.5 mL
3040. When pressed, tablets stick to the tablet press. Why such adhesion occurs?
*a. Excessive moisture of the tablet substance and high pressure
b. Heterogeneity of the granulated material
c. High specific density of the powders
d. Lamellar crystals in the tablet powder
e. Inadequate flowability of the tablet substance
3041. When pressed, tablets stick to the tablet press. Why such adhesion occurs?
*a. Excessive moisture of the tablet substance and high pressure
b. Inadequate flowability of the tablet substance
c. Lamellar crystals in the tablet powder
d. Heterogeneity of the granulated material
e. High specific density of the powders
3042. When pressed, tablets stick to the tablet press. Why such adhesion occurs?
a. High specific density of the powders
b. Heterogeneity of the granulated material
*c. Excessive moisture of the tablet substance and high pressure
d. Lamellar crystals in the tablet powder
e. Inadequate flowability of the tablet substance
3043. When pressing tablets, puncheons of a tableting machine stick to the tablet surface. What technological error is most likely in this case?
*a. Insufficient amount of lubricants
b. Insufficient amount of diluents
c. Insufficient amount of adhesives
d. Insufficient amount of dyes
e. Insufficient amount of leaveners
3044. When pressing tablets, puncheons of a tableting machine stick to the tablet surface. What technological error is most likely in this case?
a. Insufficient amount of diluents
*b. Insufficient amount of lubricants
c. Insufficient amount of dyes
d. Insufficient amount of leaveners
e. Insufficient amount of adhesives
3045. When pressing tablets, puncheons of a tableting machine stick to the tablet surface. What technological error is most likely in this case?
a. Insufficient amount of dyes
b. Insufficient amount of leaveners
*c. Insufficient amount of lubricants
d. Insufficient amount of diluents
e. Insufficient amount of adhesives
3046. When selling iron preparations that are to be taken orally, a dispensing chemist should warn the patients that these drugs cannot be taken with milk or dairy products, because it leads to:
*a. Formation of chelate complexes that cannot be assimilated into the body
b. Prolonged action of iron preparations
c. Increased activity of iron preparations
d. Accelerated clearance of iron preparations
e. Accelerated absorption of iron preparations
3047. When selling iron preparations that are to be taken orally, a dispensing chemist should warn the patients that these drugs cannot be taken with milk or dairy products, because it leads to:
a. Accelerated absorption of iron preparations
b. Prolonged action of iron preparations
*c. Formation of chelate complexes that cannot be assimilated into the body
d. Increased activity of iron preparations
e. Accelerated clearance of iron preparations
3048. When selling iron preparations that are to be taken orally, a dispensing chemist should warn the patients that these drugs cannot be taken with milk or dairy products, because it leads to:
a. Prolonged action of iron preparations
*b. Formation of chelate complexes that cannot be assimilated into the body
c. Increased activity of iron preparations
d. Accelerated absorption of iron preparations
e. Accelerated clearance of iron preparations
3049. When should aromatic water be added into a mixture, if it functions as a dispersing medium?
a. After concentrated solutions
b. After solid medicinal substances are dissolved
*c. First
d. Last, because of its essential oil content
e. Before ethanol-containing liquids are added
3050. When should aromatic water be added into a mixture, if it functions as a dispersing medium?
a. After solid medicinal substances are dissolved
*b. First
c. After concentrated solutions
d. Before ethanol-containing liquids are added
e. Last, because of its essential oil content
3051. When should aromatic water be added into a mixture, if it functions as a dispersing medium?
a. After solid medicinal substances are dissolved
b. Before ethanol-containing liquids are added
c. After concentrated solutions
*d. First
e. Last, because of its essential oil content
3052. When solution of a medicinal agent is being heated with sodium hydroxide, it produces an acrid smell; red litmus paper soaked in water becomes blue. What ion is being identified in the course of this procedure?
a. Acetate ion
b. Arsenite ion
*c. Ammonium ion
d. Carbonate ion
e. Nitrate ion
3053. When solution of a medicinal agent is being heated with sodium hydroxide, it produces an acrid smell; red litmus paper soaked in water becomes blue. What ion is being identified in the course of this procedure?
a. Carbonate ion
*b. Ammonium ion
c. Acetate ion
d. Arsenite ion
e. Nitrate ion
3054. When solution of a medicinal agent is being heated with sodium hydroxide, it produces an acrid smell; red litmus paper soaked in water becomes blue. What ion is being identified in the course of this procedure?
a. Carbonate ion
b. Acetate ion
c. Nitrate ion
d. Arsenite ion
*e. Ammonium ion
3055. When studying the demand for influenza vaccines, it was found that a pharmacy is insufficiently supplied with these vaccines. What type of demand is it?
*a. Unsatisfied
b. Satisfied
c. Hidden
d. Negative
e. Irrational
3056. When studying the demand for influenza vaccines, it was found that a pharmacy is insufficiently supplied with these vaccines. What type of demand is it?
a. Irrational
b. Negative
*c. Unsatisfied
d. Hidden
e. Satisfied
3057. When studying the demand for influenza vaccines, it was found that a pharmacy is insufficiently supplied with these vaccines. What type of demand is it?
a. Negative
b. Irrational
c. Satisfied
d. Hidden
*e. Unsatisfied
3058. Where on the shop floor of a pharmacy should various nutritional supplements and health food be placed?
a. Alongside medicines
*b. On separate shelves and in separate shopwindows
c. By their Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical Classification
d. By their application
e. By their pharmacotherapy group
3059. Where on the shop floor of a pharmacy should various nutritional supplements and health food be placed?
a. By their Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical Classification
*b. On separate shelves and in separate shopwindows
c. By their pharmacotherapy group
d. Alongside medicines
e. By their application
3060. Where on the shop floor of a pharmacy should various nutritional supplements and health food be placed?
a. By their Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical Classification
b. By their pharmacotherapy group
c. By their application
*d. On separate shelves and in separate shopwindows
e. Alongside medicines
3061. Which of the following antibiotics can be identified by means of maltol test?
a. Doxycycline hydrochloride
*b. Streptomycin sulfate
c. Amoxicillin
d. Kanamycin monosulfate
e. Lincomycin hydrochloride
3062. Which of the following antibiotics can be identified by means of maltol test?
a. Kanamycin monosulfate
*b. Streptomycin sulfate
c. Doxycycline hydrochloride
d. Amoxicillin
e. Lincomycin hydrochloride
3063. Which of the following antibiotics can be identified by means of maltol test?
a. Lincomycin hydrochloride
b. Kanamycin monosulfate
c. Amoxicillin
d. Doxycycline hydrochloride
*e. Streptomycin sulfate
3064. Which of the following diuretics textbfSHOULD NOT be given to the patients with impaired hearing?
a. Clopamide
b. Indapamide
*c. Furosemide
d. Spironolactone
e. Chlorthalidone
3065. Which of the following diuretics textbfSHOULD NOT be given to the patients with impaired hearing?
a. Indapamide
b. Clopamide
*c. Furosemide
d. Spironolactone
e. Chlorthalidone
3066. Which of the following diuretics textbfSHOULD NOT be given to the patients with impaired hearing?
a. Spironolactone
*b. Furosemide
c. Chlorthalidone
d. Clopamide
e. Indapamide
3067. Which of the following pricing factors of a manufactoring pharmaceutical enterprise is internal?
*a. Expenses
b. Consumers
c. Competitors
d. Participants in sales channels
e. State regulation of prices
3068. Which of the following pricing factors of a manufactoring pharmaceutical enterprise is internal?
*a. Expenses
b. State regulation of prices
c. Competitors
d. Participants in sales channels
e. Consumers
3069. Which of the following pricing factors of a manufactoring pharmaceutical enterprise is internal?
a. Consumers
*b. Expenses
c. Competitors
d. State regulation of prices
e. Participants in sales channels
3070. Which of the pharmacy departments is responsible for checking the quantity and quality of received goods, their storage and dispensing to other departments?
a. Compounding and production department
*b. Inventory department
c. Department of finished dosage forms
d. Department of over-the-counter drugs
e. Department of curative cosmetics
3071. Which of the pharmacy departments is responsible for checking the quantity and quality of received goods, their storage and dispensing to other departments?
a. Department of curative cosmetics
b. Compounding and production department
c. Department of over-the-counter drugs
*d. Inventory department
e. Department of finished dosage forms
3072. Which of the pharmacy departments is responsible for checking the quantity and quality of received goods, their storage and dispensing to other departments?
a. Department of curative cosmetics
b. Department of over-the-counter drugs
c. Department of finished dosage forms
*d. Inventory department
e. Compounding and production department
3073. Which of the plants listed below contain inulin?
a. Ledum palustre, Acorus calamus
*b. Inula helenium, Helianthus tuberosus
c. Salvia officinalis, Artemisia absinthium
d. Rhamnus cathartica, Sorbus aucuparia
e. Juniperus communis, Thymus serpyllum
3074. Which of the plants listed below contain inulin?
a. Ledum palustre, Acorus calamus
b. Juniperus communis, Thymus serpyllum
*c. Inula helenium, Helianthus tuberosus
d. Rhamnus cathartica, Sorbus aucuparia
e. Salvia officinalis, Artemisia absinthium
3075. Which of the plants listed below contain inulin?
a. Rhamnus cathartica, Sorbus aucuparia
b. Ledum palustre, Acorus calamus
c. Salvia officinalis, Artemisia absinthium
d. Juniperus communis, Thymus serpyllum
*e. Inula helenium, Helianthus tuberosus
3076. Which one of the listed drugs is a glycoside antibiotic?
a. Cephalexin
*b. Erythromycin
c. Polymyxin
d. Levomycetin (Chloramphenicol)
e. Tetracycline
3077. Which one of the listed drugs is a glycoside antibiotic?
a. Levomycetin (Chloramphenicol)
*b. Erythromycin
c. Tetracycline
d. Polymyxin
e. Cephalexin
3078. Which one of the listed drugs is a glycoside antibiotic?
a. Levomycetin (Chloramphenicol)
b. Tetracycline
c. Cephalexin
*d. Erythromycin
e. Polymyxin
3079. Which one of the listed solutions for injections must be stabilized with a 0.1 mol-eqL solution of hydrochloric acid?
a. Ascorbic acid
b. Sodium bicarbonate
c. Sodium thiosulfate
d. Caffeine and sodium benzoate
*e. Novocaine (Procaine)
3080. Which one of the listed solutions for injections must be stabilized with a 0.1 mol-eqL solution of hydrochloric acid?
a. Caffeine and sodium benzoate
b. Ascorbic acid
*c. Novocaine (Procaine)
d. Sodium bicarbonate
e. Sodium thiosulfate
3081. Which one of the listed solutions for injections must be stabilized with a 0.1 mol-eqL solution of hydrochloric acid?
a. Sodium bicarbonate
b. Sodium thiosulfate
c. Caffeine and sodium benzoate
d. Ascorbic acid
*e. Novocaine (Procaine)
3082. Who determines the amount of cash that may remain in the cash register at the end of a workday?
a. A revenue and duties authority
*b. The company itself
c. The Ministry of Finance
d. The National Bank of Ukraine
e. A statistics authority
3083. Who determines the amount of cash that may remain in the cash register at the end of a workday?
a. A statistics authority
*b. The company itself
c. The National Bank of Ukraine
d. A revenue and duties authority
e. The Ministry of Finance
3084. Who determines the amount of cash that may remain in the cash register at the end of a workday?
a. A statistics authority
b. The Ministry of Finance
*c. The company itself
d. A revenue and duties authority
e. The National Bank of Ukraine
3085. Who gives permission to distribute medical products between the structural divisions of a pharmacy, after these products have successfully passed the on-receipt inspection?
*a. Authorized person
b. Accountant
c. Lawyer
d. Supplier representative
e. Pharmacist on duty
3086. Who gives permission to distribute medical products between the structural divisions of a pharmacy, after these products have successfully passed the on-receipt inspection?
a. Accountant
*b. Authorized person
c. Supplier representative
d. Pharmacist on duty
e. Lawyer
3087. Who gives permission to distribute medical products between the structural divisions of a pharmacy, after these products have successfully passed the on-receipt inspection?
a. Lawyer
b. Pharmacist on duty
c. Accountant
*d. Authorized person
e. Supplier representative
3088. Who is responsible for the acceptance of goods and medical products with accompanying incoming quality control?
a. Analyst
*b. Authorized representative
c. Pharmacy head manager
d. Dispensing chemist
e. Supplier pharmacist
3089. Who is responsible for the acceptance of goods and medical products with accompanying incoming quality control?
a. Pharmacy head manager
b. Analyst
c. Dispensing chemist
*d. Authorized representative
e. Supplier pharmacist
3090. Who is responsible for the acceptance of goods and medical products with accompanying incoming quality control?
a. Supplier pharmacist
b. Pharmacy head manager
c. Dispensing chemist
*d. Authorized representative
e. Analyst
3091. Who is responsible for the patient's condition in case of self-treatment?
a. Drug manufacturer
b. Head manager of the retail pharmacy
c. Physician
d. Pharmacist
*e. Patient
3092. Who is responsible for the patient's condition in case of self-treatment?
a. Drug manufacturer
b. Physician
*c. Patient
d. Pharmacist
e. Head manager of the retail pharmacy
3093. Who is responsible for the patient's condition in case of self-treatment?
a. Pharmacist
*b. Patient
c. Physician
d. Drug manufacturer
e. Head manager of the retail pharmacy
3094. Why are leavening agents introduced into the tablet mass?
*a. Ensuring rapid mechanical destruction of the tablets in a liquid medium
b. Improvement of the granulation process
c. Obtaining tablets of the required weight
d. Making it easier to push the tablets out of the matrix
e. Taste improvement
3095. Why are leavening agents introduced into the tablet mass?
*a. Ensuring rapid mechanical destruction of the tablets in a liquid medium
b. Taste improvement
c. Making it easier to push the tablets out of the matrix
d. Improvement of the granulation process
e. Obtaining tablets of the required weight
3096. Why are leavening agents introduced into the tablet mass?
a. Taste improvement
b. Obtaining tablets of the required weight
*c. Ensuring rapid mechanical destruction of the tablets in a liquid medium
d. Making it easier to push the tablets out of the matrix
e. Improvement of the granulation process
3097. Within the last year the ''East-Pharmacy'' pharmaceutical wholesaler has lost 10% of its employees, who resigned and were hired by the competitor company ''East-Optima''. Individual transfer of the ''East-Pharmacy'' employees to the ''East-Optima'' company can be characterized as:
*a. Staff turnover
b. Job rotation
c. Staff motivation
d. Personnel certification
e. Staff dynamics
3098. Within the last year the ''East-Pharmacy'' pharmaceutical wholesaler has lost 10% of its employees, who resigned and were hired by the competitor company ''East-Optima''. Individual transfer of the ''East-Pharmacy'' employees to the ''East-Optima'' company can be characterized as:
a. Staff dynamics
*b. Staff turnover
c. Personnel certification
d. Staff motivation
e. Job rotation
3099. Within the last year the ''East-Pharmacy'' pharmaceutical wholesaler has lost 10% of its employees, who resigned and were hired by the competitor company ''East-Optima''. Individual transfer of the ''East-Pharmacy'' employees to the ''East-Optima'' company can be characterized as:
a. Staff dynamics
b. Job rotation
c. Personnel certification
*d. Staff turnover
e. Staff motivation
3100. Working hours for the pharmacy workers are reduced. What is the length of the work week for the pharmacist-analyst?
*a. 36 hours
b. 32 hours
c. 30 hours
d. 24 hours
e. 45 hours
3101. Working hours for the pharmacy workers are reduced. What is the length of the work week for the pharmacist-analyst?
a. 24 hours
b. 30 hours
c. 32 hours
d. 45 hours
*e. 36 hours
3102. Working hours for the pharmacy workers are reduced. What is the length of the work week for the pharmacist-analyst?
a. 45 hours
b. 24 hours
c. 30 hours
d. 32 hours
*e. 36 hours
3103. Xycaine quantitative content can be determined by means of argentometry (back titration). What indicator is required by this method?
*a. Iron (III) ammonium sulphate
b. Potassium chromate
c. Starch
d. Sodium eosinate
e. Bromphenol blue
3104. Xycaine quantitative content can be determined by means of argentometry (back titration). What indicator is required by this method?
a. Bromphenol blue
*b. Iron (III) ammonium sulphate
c. Potassium chromate
d. Sodium eosinate
e. Starch
3105. Xycaine quantitative content can be determined by means of argentometry (back titration). What indicator is required by this method?
a. Starch
b. Sodium eosinate
*c. Iron (III) ammonium sulphate
d. Bromphenol blue
e. Potassium chromate
