1. A 39-year-old woman complains of bad breath, bleeding and sore gums, and loose teeth. Objectively, the gums are hyperemic and edematous, the lower front teeth exhibit the I-II degree mobility. Periodontal pockets are 4-5 mm deep. X-ray shows resorption of interdental septa up to 1/2 of the root length. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Generalized periodontitis, I degree,  exacerbated progression
b. Generalized periodontitis, I degree,  chronic progression
c. Generalized periodontitis, III degree,  chronic progression
d. Generalized periodontitis, II degree,  chronic progression
*e. Generalized periodontitis, II degree,  exacerbated progression

2. During carious cavity preparation in a 20-year-old man, the pulp-chamber floor was accidentally perforated and horn of the pulp was exposed. On the carious cavity floor there is a point-like puncture surrounded with white predentin. Pink pulp can be seen through the perforation, pulp probing is acutely painful. What treatment should be given to the patient?
*a. Biological approach
b. Vital extirpation
c. Vital amputation
d. Devital extirpation
e. Devital amputation

3. The parents of a 7-year-old child complain that their child for the last 2 days has been presenting with body temperature of 38.8^oC and a sore throat. Objectively, catarrhal stomatitis is observed on the gums, cheeks, lips, and on the floor of the oral cavity. The submandibular lymph nodes are enlarged and painful. Bright-red catarrhal inflammation is present on the soft palate, tonsils, and palatine arches. The tongue is edematous, red, and dry. The skin of the face is hyperemic, except for the white nasolabial triangle. Make the diagnosis:
a. Chickenpox
b. Pertussis
c. Infectious mononucleosis
*d. Scarlet fever
e. Measles

4. A 40-year-old woman came to an orthopedic dentist with complaints of an aesthetic defect due to missing teeth 24 and 25. Examination shows that the clinical crowns of her teeth 23 and 26 are of optimal height and stable. X-ray detects no changes in the periapical tissues. A porcelain-fused-to-mental dental bridge with abutment teeth 23 and 26 is to be made for the patient. What impressions must be obtained in this case?
a. Anatomical working and auxiliary impressions of the both jaws
b. Two-layer working impression of the maxilla
c. Partial impressions of both jaws
d. Complete working impression of the maxilla, partial impression of the mandible
*e. Two-layer working impression of the maxilla and anatomical auxiliary impression of the mandible

5. Preventive examination of a 6.5-year-old child revealed a carious cavity with a narrow entrance in the distolingual groove on the masticatory surface of tooth 46. The cavity floor is localized within the softened mantle dentin. Other areas of the fissure are intact. The dentist has chosen the method of preventive filling. What tactics is advisable regarding the intact areas of the fissure?
a. Applications with fluoride-containing lacquers
b. Invasive sealing
*c. Non-invasive sealing
d. Applications with antiseptic lacquers
e. Applications with calcium-containing gels

6. During dental procedures, a 29-year-old man after receiving anesthesia suddenly developed a dense non-itching skin edema in the area of his face and neck. The edema was accompanied by cough and wheezing. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Urticaria
b. Bronchial asthma attack
c. Contact dermatitis
d. Anaphylactic shock
*e. Quincke's edema

7. An 8-year-old girl has been complaining of pain in her lower right tooth for the second day already. The tooth was treated 6 months ago. Objectively, her general condition is satisfactory, the body temperature has increased to 37.4°С, the face is asymmetric due to edema of the soft tissues of the right cheek, the skin is of a physiological color, the mouth fully opens. The crown of tooth 84 is discolored (grayish-pink), its masticatory surface has a filling, the tooth is painful to percussion. Teeth 83 and 85 are intact. The mucogingival junction in the projection of teeth 83, 84, 85 is smoothed-out, the mucosa in this area is edematous and mildly hyperemic. Make the provisional diagnosis.
a. Acute odontogenic osteomyelitis of the mandible
*b. Acute serous odontogenic periostitis of the mandible
c. Physiological replacement of tooth 84
d. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
e. Acute purulent odontogenic periostitis of the mandible

8. A 32-year-old man has metallic inlay made for him. The denture is being made for tooth 36 with Black's class I carious cavity. What surfaces of the inlay should be filed down and polished before fixing the denture?
a. Lateral surfaces and inlay bottom
b. Inlay bottom
*c. Occlusal surface
d. Lateral surfaces
e. All surfaces

9. A 35-year-old patient undergoes treatment of chronic fibrous pulpitis of tooth 25. The canal is to be filled using the warm gutta-percha vertical condensation technique. What instrument is needed for gutta-percha condensation?
a. K-file
b. Root needle
*c. Plugger
d. Endodontic probe
e. Spreader

10. A patient complains of carious cavity in tooth 11. The filling was lost one week ago. The tooth crown is dark, there is residual filling material at the bottom of the carious cavity. Vertical percussion is painless. X-ray shows an oval area of bone tissue resorption with clear margins, 0.4х0.3 cm in size. The root canal is filled by 2/3 of its length. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Chronic granulomatous periodontitis
b. Radicular cyst
c. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
d. Chronic granulating periodontitis
e. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis

11. A 40-year-old man came to a dentist with complaints of tooth mobility, pain and gingival bleeding that occurs when he brushes his teeth. Objectively, the roots of teeth 13, 12, 11, 47, 46, 45, 35, 36 and 37 are exposed by over 2/3; they have the mobility of the III-IV degree. It is planned to extract the mobile teeth in the front area. What are the terms for making an immediate denture?
*a. Make the dentures before the teeth extraction and fix the dentures immediately after the extraction
b. Make the dentures in three months after the teeth extraction
c. Make the dentures on the day after the teeth extraction
d. Make the dentures in a month after the teeth extraction
e. Make the dentures in ten days after the teeth extraction

12. A 40-year-old serviceman came to the orthopedic dentistry department with complaints of dull intermittent aching pain in his left temporomandibular joint, its morning stiffness and creaking. Objectively, the face is symmetrical, the distance between the cutting edges of the central incisors during the maximum opening of the mouth is 2.5 cm. During movements of the lower jaw, joint noise and clicking are observed. Skin over the joint has no visible changes. X-ray shows deformation of the articular surfaces of the left temporomandibular joint. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Bone ankylosis of the left  temporomandibular joint
*b. Arthrosis of the left temporomandibular joint
c. Pain dysfunction of the left  temporomandibular joint
d. Mandibular subluxation
e. Acute arthritis of the left  temporomandibular joint

13. After extraction of tooth 46, a 41-year-old man noticed a dark defect on the distal contact surface of tooth 45. The defect is limited to the enamel, has blurred margins and dark brown color. The affected tissue crumbles when probed. Make the diagnosis:
a. Chronic initial caries, Black class IV
*b. Chronic superficial caries, Black class II
c. Chronic median caries, Black class IV
d. Chronic initial caries, Black class II
e. Chronic superficial caries, Black class IV

14. X-ray of the patient shows a focus of bone destruction 3x4 cm in size in the mandibular body. The focus is structured as numerous small cavities different in size and shape and separated by septa. Tumor puncture yielded brown liquid. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Carcinoma of the mandible
b. Soft odontoma of the mandible
c. Mandibular ameloblastoma
*d. Giant cell tumor of the mandible
e. Radicular cyst of the mandible

15. A 48-year-old man came to a dental surgeon for extraction of the roots of tooth 37. What instrument must be used for this procedure?
a. S-shaped forceps
b. Beak-shaped forceps, curved in a plane
c. Bayonet forceps
d. Beak-shaped non-crushing forceps
*e. Beak-shaped crushing forceps

16. A man complains of pain in his lower right jaw and impaired mouth opening. Objectively on visual examination his face is symmetrical, mouth opening is slightly impaired, trismus of the 1 degree is observed. Mucosa behind tooth 47 is swollen, hyperemic, and painful on palpation. Medial cusps of tooth 48 are visible, while the tooth itself has not fully erupted. What provisional diagnosis can be made?
a. Acute odontogenic osteomyelitis
b. Abscess of the pterygomandibular space
c. Exacerbation of chronic granulating periodontitis
d. Acute odontogenic periostitis
*e. Pericoronitis

17. A 28-year-old man came to the maxillofacial surgery department. He complains of a cutaneous neoplasm in his right submandibular region. The neoplasm appeared approximately 2 years ago. In the process of shaving, the neoplasm was frequently injured. He was diagnosed with papilloma. In the neoplastic area, examination shows an ulcer against the background of hyperemic skin. What tactics should the dental surgeon choose?
a. Removal of the papilloma and postoperative radiation therapy
b. Antibacterial and anti-inflammatory therapy, observation
c. Anti-inflammatory therapy followed by removal of the papilloma
*d. Prevention of malignant transformation of the papilloma. Removal of the papilloma
e. Anti-inflammatory therapy followed by observation

18. A 32-year-old woman needs a denture. On objective examination the decision was made in favor of porcelain-fused-to-metal crown. What material should be used in this case to obtain the impression?
a. Repin
b. Orthocor
c. Stens
d. Stomalgin
*e. Stomaflex

19. A 30-year-old woman came to a dentist with complaints of a cavity in her upper right tooth. Objective examination detected a carious cavity with a wide opening on the masticatory surface of tooth 16. The cavity is located within dense and pigmented peripulpal dentin. The carious cavity does not communicate with the pulp chamber. Probing of the cavity walls and floor, cold stimuli, and percussion are painless. Electric pulp testing - 12 microamperes. Make the diagnosis.
*a. Chronic deep caries
b. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
c. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis
d. Chronic median caries
e. Chronic fibrous periodontitis

20. A patient received a chemical burn to the face. The burn was caused by sulfuric acid. What substance should be used in the wound processing to neutralize this acid?
a. Alcohol
b. Acid
c. Flowing water
*d. Alkali
e. Antiseptic

21. A 21-year-old man complains of difficult mouth opening and visible facial deformation throughout the last 2 years. He has a history of facial trauma several years ago. Examination shows the right side of the face to be flattened, the chin is displaced to the right. Palpation detects diminished excursion of the articular head in the left lower jaw. Mouth opening is reduced to 1 cm. Make the preliminary diagnosis:
*a. Ankylosis of the left temporomandibular joint
b. Anterior dislocation of the lower jaw
c. Arthrosis of the left temporomandibular joint
d. Acute arthritis of the left temporomandibular joint
e. Exacerbated chronic arthritis of the left temporomandibular joint

22. What dental appliances are used for the treatment of distal occlusion in the milk bite period?
*a. Functional action appliances
b. Combined action appliances
c. Edgewise technique
d. Mechanical action appliances
e. Extraoral appliances

23. A 47-year-old man has lost his lower left premolars. After that the teeth at the edges of the defect have been gradually sliding inside the defect. At the same time the antagonist teeth started to protrude toward the edentulous segment of the alveolar bone. In the medical literature, such clinical presentation is called:
a. Phenomenon of relative tooth-alveolar lengthening
b. Papillon-Lefevre syndrome
c. Kourliandski phenomenon
d. Castaigne syndrome
*e. Popov-Godon phenomenon

24. A patient is undergoing treatment for chronic granulating periodontitis of tooth 26. The root canals were irrigated with an antiseptic that can penetrate into the structures of biofilms, destroy them, and dissolve organic tissues. What antiseptic was used by the doctor?
*a. Hypochlorite sodium solution
b. Physiological saline
c. Furacilin (nitrofurazone) solution
d. Hydrogen peroxide solution
e. Chlorhexidine solution

25. A maxillofacial surgery department has received a 34-year-old man with a frostbite on his face. Examination shows that the skin in the affected area is edematous, hyperemic, and cyanotic. No tissue necrosis. What degree of the frostbite is it?
a. ІІ degree
*b. I degree
c. ІІІ degree
d. ІV degree
e. -

26. A 28-year-old man has received a trauma of the mental region. X-ray shows a bilateral mental fracture of the lower jaw. In what direction will the displacement of the lesser fragment occur?
*a. Downwards and backwards
b. Downwards and forwards
c. -
d. Upwards and backwards
e. No displacement occurs

27. A patient with a defect in the crown portion of tooth 26 came to a dentist with complaints of frequent loss of photopolymer fillings. Examination of tooth 26 revealed a carious cavity, Black's class I. Occlusal surface destruction index is 0.6. What would be the optimal treatment in this case?
*a. Inlay
b. Pivot crown
c. Tooth extraction and making a dental  bridge
d. Artificial crown
e. Cement filling

28. A 9-year-old boy complains of pain in his upper right tooth that intensifies during biting. The pain appeared 2 days ago. The tooth was previously treated. Objectively, the crown of tooth 65 is discolored and destroyed by 2/3, its percussion is sharply painful. The mucosa in the projection area of the root apices of tooth 65 is hyperemic, its palpation is painful. What is the provisional diagnosis in this case?
*a. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
b. Acute serous periodontitis
c. Acute odontogenic osteomyelitis
d. Acute purulent maxillary periostitis
e. Acute purulent periodontitis

29. A 21-year-old man 3 hours ago received a knife wound to the right cheek; the wound was initially bleeding, but by the time of examination the bleeding has already stopped. Objectively in the area of the right cheek there was a wound 4x1 cm with even margins that does not penetrate into the oral cavity and is filled with clotted blood. What sutures should be applied to the wound in this case?
a. Early secondary suture
b. Late secondary suture
c. Primary approximation suture
d. Primary apposition suture
*e. Primary blind suture

30. The parents of a 10-year-old girl came to a dental orthodontist complaining that their child has an aesthetic defect. The girl has a history of formula feeding and had been using a pacifier for a long time. Objectively, her face is symmetrical, but disproportionate due to the shortening of its lower third, the chin is slanted back. The bite is transitional, there is a contact between the cusps of the corresponding first permanent molars and canines, the sagittal fissure is 7 mm, the upper incisors overlap the lower ones by more than 1/2 of the crown height. During the Eschler-Bittner test, the child's appearance improves. What orthodontic appliance should be used to treat this occlusal pathology?
a. Frankel functional regulator, type III
b. Kraus plate
*c. Schwartz appliance
d. Bracket system
e. Bruckl appliance

31. A 37-year-old woman came to the dentist with complaints of brief attacks of toothache caused by eating sweets. Objectively there is a shallow carious cavity within enamel. On probing cavity walls and bottom are coarse; there is no response to thermal stimuli. Make the diagnosis:
a. Chronic median caries
b. Acute median caries
*c. Acute superficial caries
d. Enamel hypoplasia
e. Endemic fluorosis

32. A 45-year-old man presents with facial asymmetry due to a dense isolated infiltration in his right buccal area; the skin over the infiltration is cyanotic, thinned out; in the center of the infiltration there is a fistula. In the oral cavity the crown of 46 is destroyed by 2/3, along the mucogingival fold the band connecting the tooth with the fistula can be palpated. Make the diagnosis:
a. Odontogenic lymphadenitis
*b. Migrating facial granuloma
c. Actinomycosis
d. Chronic mandibular osteomyelitis
e. Cheek furuncle

33. How often should a dentist's office be thoroughly cleaned?
*a. No less than once a week
b. No less than once every 2 weeks
c. No less than once a month
d. No less than once a year
e. No less than twice a week

34. A 33-year-old man came to a dental surgeon complaining of frequent exacerbations of pain and inflammation in his lower right wisdom tooth within the last 6 months. Currently, the patient is not in pain, the mouth opens freely. Examination detects visible mesial cusps of an atypically located impacted tooth 48. Mandibular X-ray shows dystopic tooth 48 on the right, the crown of which presses into tooth 47. What should the doctor do in this case?
a. Referral for orthodontic treatment
b. Monitoring until complete eruption of  tooth 48
c. Extraction of tooth 47
*d. Atypical extraction of tooth 48
e. Excision of the operculum over tooth 48

35. A 29-year-old man came to the surgery department of a dental hospital. He complains of painful facial swelling on the right that appeared 1.5-2 months ago and has been gradually increasing since then. Objectively mouth opening is unrestricted, the face is asymmetrical due to a swelling in the right parotid-masseteric region. The skin over the edema is hyperemic and swollen; palpation detects a painful infiltration 3 cm in size. Massage in this region results in discharge of clear saliva from the excretory duct of the right parotid salivary gland. What disease can be suspected in this case?
a. Acute suppurative parotitis on the right
*b. Chronic suppurative lymphadenitis of the right parotid-masseteric region
c. Furuncle of the right parotid-masseteric region
d. Submasseteric abscess on the right
e. Chronic interstitial parotitis on the right

36. A patient came to a dentist for extraction of tooth 24 due to orthodontic indication. Select the forceps necessary to perform this manipulation.
a. Straight forceps
b. Bayonet forceps
*c. S-shaped crown forceps
d. S-shaped left-sided forceps
e. S-shaped right-sided forceps

37. A 44-year-old man came to the dental polyclinic to have a denture made for him. He complains of problematic chewing and aesthetical defects. Objectively teeth 14, 15, and 22 are missing. According to Agapov, the loss of masticatory efficiency in this case is:
a. 20%
b. 12%
c. 16%
*d. 18%
e. 9%

38. A removable full denture for the lower jaw is being made for a 75-year-old man. Objectively the alveolar process is slightly atrophied. Herbst tests are performed during fitting of an impression tray. When lips are stretched forwards the tray slips off. Where should the tray edge be shortened in this case?
a. In the premolar area on the lingual side
b. Along the mylohyoid line
c. From canine to canine on the lingual side
d. From behind the mandibular tuberosity to the mylohyoid line
*e. From canine to canine on the vestibular side

39. An 8-year-old child was diagnosed with acute odontogenic mandibular periostitis on the right originating from tooth 74. What treatment method would be optimal in this case?
a. -
b. Endodontic treatment of 74, pharmacotherapy
c. Endodontic treatment of 74, periosteotomy
*d. Extraction of 74, periosteotomy, pharmacotherapy
e. Periosteotomy, pharmacotherapy

40. A 69-year-old woman came to a dentist complaining of problematic swallowing and her teeth clacking when she talks. The complaints arose after she started using her recently made complete removable dentures for the upper and lower jaws. What mistake did the doctor make when making the dentures for this patient?
a. The Bonville three-point contact has not been formed
*b. The bite height is too high
c. The bite height is too low
d. The denture plane is defined incorrectly
e. The edges of the functional impression  are designed incorrectly

41. A 25-year-old man complains of a cavity in his lower left tooth, pain after eating sweet, sour, or solid food. Objectively in tooth 16 there is a deep carious cavity filled with light-colored softened dentin. Probing of the cavity floor is painful, pain stimulus is painful, but cold abates immediately after the stimulus is removed. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute median caries
b. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
c. Acute focal pulpitis
d. Chronic deep caries
*e. Acute deep caries

42. A 46-year-old man needs a classic 2-stage surgical installation of implants into the upper jaw. How long should be the interval between stages 1 and 2?
a. 1 month
b. 2 months
c. 0.5 months
*d. 3-6 months
e. 1.5 months

43. A 35-year-old man complains of sour sensation in his mouth and front teeth sensitivity to thermal and mechanical stimuli. Objective examination revealed visible changes in the enamel of 13, 12, 11, 21, 22, and 23. The enamel is dull, rough, missing on the cutting edge. Probing of the vestibular surface of these teeth is painful, response to thermal stimuli is positive. The patient's medical record states his occupation in industrial production of inorganic acids. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Necrosis of dental hard tissues
b. Enamel erosion
c. Fluorosis
d. Pathologic teeth grinding
e. Enamel hypoplasia

44. A 7-year-old boy was diagnosed with chronic periodontitis of teeth 64 and 85. The child has hemophilia A) Determine the treatment tactics for this case:
*a. Teeth extraction is possible in the  hematology department after all the  necessary preparations
b. Teeth extraction is possible in an  outpatient setting; after the teeth extraction, the alveoli must be packed with a hemostatic sponge
c. Teeth extraction is contraindicated due to the high risk of bleeding
d. Teeth extraction is possible in the  maxillofacial department
e. Teeth extraction is possible both in the maxillofacial inpatient department and in the outpatient department after all the   necessary preparations

45. A 21-year-old young man came to an orthodontist complaining about his markedly visible labiomental fold. Objectively, the lower third of his face is reduced and the labiomental fold is markedly visible. Intraoral examination reveals no contact between the front teeth of both jaws when they are closed, the sagittal fissure is 4 mm, the anterior buccal cusp of the first upper molar is in contact with its counterpart of the first lower molar. What abnormal bite is it characteristic of?
a. Crossbite
*b. Distal bite
c. Open bite
d. Mesial bite
e. Deep bite

46. During intraoral examination the dentist suspected that the patient has syphilis. What should the dentist do in this case?
a. Continue the examination and start the teeth preparation
b. Obtain the impressions to study the diagnostic models
c. Decline to provide dental services for this patient
*d. Complete the examination and refer the patient for necessary tests
e. Inform the patient of the suspected diagnosis and end the visit

47. An 8-year-old girl complains of bleeding gums. The child has diabetes mellitus. Objectively the interdental papillae between the teeth of the upper and lower jaw are hyperemic, swollen, and cover the crowns by 1/3 of their height. The teeth exhibit mobility of the I degree. What investigation technique is necessary for diagnosis-making in this case?
a. PMA index
b. Stomatoscopy
c. Rheoparodontography
*d. X-ray
e. Vacuum test

48. Puncture sample taken from a 13-year-old child contains giant Reed-Sternberg cells. What diagnosis can be confirmed by the cell content of this puncture material?
a. Infectious mononucleosis
b. Lymphocytic leukemia
*c. Lymphogranulomatosis
d. Lymph node actinomycosis
e. Tuberculous lymphadenitis

49. A 35-year-old man complains of persisting pain in tooth 24, which intensifies on biting. Objectively on the distal masticatory surface of tooth 24 there is a deep carious cavity filled with food debris. Percussion of cavity bottom is painless, there is no pain response to thermal stimuli. Percussion of tooth 24 is acutely painful. X-ray shows no pathologic changes of periapical tissues in the area of root apices of 24. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
b. Acute suppurative pulpitis
c. Acute suppurative periodontitis
*d. Acute serous periodontitis
e. Acute diffuse pulpitis

50. A 40-year-old man has a fresh mental mandibular fracture without visible displacement of the fragments. What dental orthopedic appliance is recommended in this case?
*a. Fixing
b. Directing
c. Reponating
d. Forming
e. Replacing

51. A 70-year-old man complains of displacement of the lower jaw to the right when he opens his mouth, clicking in the left temporomandibular joint, and slight pain during eating. According to the patient, his mouth opening gradually becomes reduced. X-ray shows a round focus of significant darkening with clear contours in the area of the left articular process. The density of the focus matches the density of the cortical plate. What is the provisional diagnosis in this case?
*a. Osteoma
b. Giant-cell tumor of bone
c. Chondroma
d. Odontoma
e. Osteoid osteoma

52. Mother and her 11-year-old daughter came to the medical station. According to the mother her daughter has fallen when playing outdoors. The doctor determined the patient to have an isolated mechanical injury of soft tissues in her cheek with damaged skin. Make the diagnosis:
a. Bruice
b. Wound
c. Hematoma
*d. Abrasion
e. Contusion

53. A 5-year-old child developed a hemorrhage after pulp extirpation of 74 due to exacerbated chronic pulpitis. The child suffers from Von Willebrand disease. What actions should be taken by the dental surgeon to stop bleeding?
*a. To hospitalize the child to the hematological unit
b. To hospitalize the child to the maxillofacial unit
c. To plug the cavity with hemostatic sponge
d. To place sutures on the mucosa
e. To plug the cavity with epsilon-aminocaproic acid dressing

54. A 24-year-old man needs to have his tooth 47 extracted due to exacerbation of chronic periodontitis. What is the optimal method of peripheral conduction anesthesia in this case?
*a. Torusal anesthesia
b. Infiltration anesthesia
c. Mental anesthesia
d. Plexus anesthesia
e. Extraoral mandibular anesthesia

55. A 25-year-old man was diagnosed with acute deep caries of tooth 13, Black class V. Photopolymer composite material is planned to be used for aesthetical restoration of tooth 13. What material should be used as a lining for the floor of the carious cavity in this case?
*a. Calcium-containing paste
b. Devitalizing paste
c. Dentin paste
d. Iodoform paste
e. Resorcin-formalin paste

56. During or immediately after an injection, certain local complications can develop. What is textbf{NOT one of those complications?
*a. Mucosal necrosis
b. Diplopia
c. Damage to a blood vessel by the needle
d. Dermal ischemia
e. Functional paralysis or paresis of facial muscles

57. A clasp (bugel) denture with clammer fixation is being made for a partially edentulous (Kennedy class I) man. Impressions were obtained, casts were made, and the centric relation of the jaws was determined and fixed. What laboratory stage of the denture-making is the next one?
*a. Studying the working cast in a  parallelometer
b. Marking the denture frame
c. Installation of the gating system
d. Duplication of the cast
e. Obtaining a refractory cast

58. A 52-year-old man complains of pain and clicking in the area of his left temporomandibular joint. Objectively, the face is symmetrical, palpation of the medial and lateral pterygoid muscles is painful on the left. The mouth opening is limited to 1.5 cm between the cutting edges of the central incisors. X-ray shows smooth contours of the articular surfaces, the joint space is normal. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Acute post-traumatic arthritis
b. Rheumatoid arthritis
c. Deforming arthrosis
*d. Neuromuscular joint syndrome
e. Fibrous ankylosis of the joint

59. A 45-year-old man came to the prosthodontic department to have a denture made for him. Before the preparation of the hard tissues of the intact teeth, the patient was given an infiltration anesthesia with 0.5% lidocaine solution. Several minutes later he developed depressed level of consciousness, his blood pressure dropped, convulsions started, and involuntary urination occurred. What emergency condition did the patient develop?
*a. Anaphylactic shock
b. Collapse
c. Syncope
d. Pain shock
e. Heart failure

60. Decay-missing-filled index of a 6.5-year-old child is DMF+df=7. Fedorov-Volodkina hygiene index is 1.5. Fissures in the permanent molars are intact, deep, and open. What method of caries prevention would be advisable in this case?
a. Electrophoresis-aided application of remineralization solution
b. Application of remineralization solution
c. Application of fluoride varnish
d. Invasive fissure sealing
*e. Noninvasive fissure sealing

61. The parents of a 4-year-old girl complain of defects on the upper teeth of their child. Objectively, her upper incisors have defects in the cervical region of their vestibular surface. The defects do not cross the dentinoenamel junction and look like patches of chalky enamel with visible destruction of its structure. Probing detects a rough softened surface. There is no response to cold stimuli. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Chronic initial caries
b. Acute initial caries
c. Acute median caries
*d. Acute superficial caries
e. Chronic superficial caries

62. A 30-year-old man came to a dentist with complaints of pain in his lower front teeth, which he associates with a chin injury. Objectively, the dentition ratio is orthognathic. X-ray shows a non-displaced midline mandibular fracture. What splint would be optimal in this case?
a. Vasiliev splint
b. Weber splint
c. Port splint
*d. Smooth splint-brace
e. Limberg splint

63. A 9-year-old boy complains of an incorrect placement of his teeth. Because of his chronic rhinitis, he has been registered for regular check-up by an otolaryngologist since he was four. Objectively, during the examination his mouth is slightly open, the nostrils do not participate in breathing, his upper incisors protrude from under the upper lip. The chin is slanted backwards. The sagittal fissure is 5 mm. What is the etiology of the occlusal pathology in this child?
a. Sagittal reduction of the upper jaw
b. Heredity
*c. Pathology of the upper respiratory tract
d. Bad habits
e. Jaw injury

64. A 4-year-old practically healthy child came for oral cavity sanation. Objectively on the masticatory surface of 75 there is a carious cavity within mantle dentin. The cavity is filled with softened dentin. Dentinoenamel junction is painful on probing. What material would be optimal for permanent filling?
a. Phosphate cement
b. Composite material
*c. Glass ionomer cement
d. Silicophosphate cement
e. Silicate cement

65. A 16-year-old girl came to a dentist with complaints of a carious cavity in her upper right tooth that accumulates food debris. Examination revealed a carious cavity with a wide opening in tooth 14. The dentin of the cavity floor and walls is dense and pigmented. Electric pulp testing - 4 microamperes. During the treatment, a pulp horn was accidentally exposed. What doctor's tactics would be optimal in this case?
*a. Application of odontotropic paste
b. Tooth extraction
c. Application of mummifying paste
d. Vital extirpation of the pulp
e. Vital amputation of the pulp

66. A 26-year-old woman, who works with chemical substances at a factory, came to a dentist with complaints of teeth discoloration and extreme sensitivity to cold, sweet, and sour foods in her upper front teeth. Objectively, on the vestibular surface of teeth 13, 12, 11, 21, 22, and 23, at their equator, there are white spots that spread to the cutting edges. Probing detects rough and fragile enamel in the affected areas. Vital staining is positive. Make the clinical diagnosis:
a. Systemic enamel hypoplasia
b. Erosion of hard dental tissues
*c. Necrosis of hard dental tissues
d. Acute initial caries
e. Hyperesthesia of hard dental tissues

67. Preventive examination of a 15-year-old girl by a dentist revealed a carious cavity in the vestibular paracervical region of her tooth 36. The cavity has a wide opening and is located within dense, pigmented enamel. Probing of the defect is painless. Thermal stimulation results are negative. Make the diagnosis.
a. Chronic median caries
*b. Chronic superficial caries
c. Chronic initial caries
d. Acute initial caries
e. Acute superficial caries

68. Parents of an 8-year-old girl complain of their child having an aesthetic defect of her teeth. Objectively the patient's lower face is shortened. Her chin protrudes forwards and her upper lip is sunken. During teeth closure the deep underbite becomes apparent. Mesio-occlusion is observed in the lateral areas. Choose the apparatus optimal for the treatment:
a. Andresen-Haupl activator
b. Frankel functional regulator - 1
c. Osadchy apparatus
d. Frankel functional regulator - 2
*e. Frankel functional regulator - 3

69. A 30-year-old man came to a  dentist with complaints of short-term pain provoked by cold stimuli in a lower tooth. The pain disappears immediately after the stimulus removal. Objectively, on the masticatory surface of tooth 47 there is a carious cavity filled with light-colored softened dentin. Probing of the cavity floor causes slight pain, thermal test is positive during the action of the stimulus. X-ray shows no changes in the periapical tissues. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
b. Acute median caries
*c. Acute deep caries
d. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
e. Acute limited pulpitis

70. Preventive examination of a 20-year-old young woman by a dentist detected multiple chalk-like spots on the approximal surfaces and in the pericervical regions of her upper and lower premolars. The lesions are somewhat symmetrical. Objectively, the size of the spots is several millimeters. When the spots are dried, enamel there has no luster. Probing is painless, the surface is smooth. The dentist used vital staining of the dental hard tissues as an additional study. What is the purpose of this method?
a. Assessment of the caries spread
b. Measuring the depth of the hard tissue damage
*c. Caries diagnostics
d. Measuring the activity of the process
e. Hygiene assessment

71. A 55-year-old man suffered a blow to the frontal mandibular area. He is diagnosed with mandibular fracture. Prior to trauma he was wearing removable dentures (partial laminar denture for the lower law and full denture for the upper jaw). What can be used for transport immobilization of the fracture?
a. Vasiliev splint
*b. Patient's dentures
c. Weber splint
d. Vankevych splint
e. Zbarzh apparatus

72. In an outpatient dental surgeon's office, a patient undergoes extraction of tooth 36. After administering anaesthesia, the doctor started working with an elevator. Suddenly, the patient complained of dizziness, ringing in the ears, and vision blackout. Objectively, the patient's face is pale, the patient has broken out in a cold sweat, a short-term loss of consciousness up to 1 minute has occurred. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Anaphylactic shock
b. Shock
c. Collapse
d. Hypoglycemic coma
*e. Unconsciousness

73. A 42-year-old woman after examination was diagnosed with closed medial mandibular fracture in the area of 31, 41, non-displaced. Crown portions of her other teeth are intact. Additionally she was diagnosed with chronic generalized parodontitis of moderate severity. What type of splint would be the most advisable for fracture treatment in this patient?
a. Vankevych dentogingival splint
b. Tigerstedt splint
c. Port gingival splint
*d. Weber dentogingival splint
e. Tigerstedt splint with anchor hooks

74. A 16-year-old girl came to a dental orthodontist with complaints of a loosened bracket on tooth 12. The bracket system was installed one week ago. Intraoral examination detects residual fixation material on tooth 12, the bracket is displaced and remains attached to the arch due to the ligature. What is the main active element of the bracket system?
a. Buccal tube
b. Orthodontic ring
c. Metal ligature
d. Bracket
*e. Orthodontic archwire

75. In a state of inebriation a 36-year-old woman suffered a domestic accident 4 hours ago. She was delivered to the maxillofacial surgery unit. On examination she was provisionally diagnosed with a deep perforating incised wound of the lateral surface of her face with injured perioral area and parotid gland. The woung edges are gaping. This gaping is caused by:
a. Wound communication with the oral cavity
b. Specifics of facial innervation
c. Depth of the wound
d. Location of masticatory muscles
*e. Location of facial muscles

76. A 34-year-old woman complains of a pain in her lower left jaw. Two months ago her teeth 35, 36, and 37 were extracted. Objectively, her lower left jaw has a cuff-like thickening. X-ray shows a sequestrum. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Ameloblastoma
b. Acute purulent periostitis
c. Mandibular sarcoma
*d. Chronic odontogenic osteomyelitis
e. Acute serous alveolitis

77. A 42-year-old woman came to a dentist with complaints of bad breath and tooth mobility. Objectively, the gums in the area of all her teeth are edematous, hyperemic, cyanotic, and bleed when touched. Traumatic occlusion is observed in the area of the lower front teeth, the necks of these teeth are exposed, the periodontal pockets are 3.5-5 mm deep and filled with purulent exudate. The teeth have mobility of the I-II degree. X-ray shows resorption of interdental septa up to 1/3-1/2 of the root length. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Chronic hypertrophic gingivitis, degree II,  exacerbation
b. Localized periodontitis, chronic  progression
c. Generalized periodontitis, degree II,  chronic progression
*d. Generalized periodontitis, degree  II, exacerbation
e. Generalized periodontitis, degree I,  chronic progression

78. The parents of a 5-month-old boy came to a dentist complaining that their child frequently cries, refuses to eat, has an increased body temperature of 37.3°С and his gums became red. Examination detected brightly hyperemic and edematous gums in the frontal area of the lower jaw, with bluish spots. What is the likely cause of the gingival inflammation in this case?
a. Herpetic infection
b. Infectious mononucleosis
c. Acute candidiasis
d. Scarlet fever
*e. Tooth eruption

79. A 49-year-old man was diagnosed with recurrence of lower lip cancer two years after he had undergone radiation therapy. Objectively in the area of his lower right lip there is a neoplasm 1x2 cm in size with an ulcer in its center. In the right submandibular area there are 2 round, enlarged, dense, painless lymph nodes. What approach to the treatment would be optimal in this case?
*a. Combined treatment
b. Rectangular resection of the lower lip
c. Vanakh's operation
d. Wedge resection of the lower lip
e. Trapezial resection of the lower lip

80. A 21-year-old man with facial furuncle was brought to the maxillofacial department. What facial localization of furuncles and carbuncles is often complicated by trombophlebitis of the angular vein?
*a. Upper lip and infraorbital area
b. Cheek and parotid-masseteric region
c. Nose and external canthus of the eye
d. Lower lip and chin
e. Lower lip and jaw angle

81. After sustained trauma a man developed nose bleeding, reduced mouth opening, sensation of paresthesia in the right infraorbital region and lower eyelid. Objectively the face is asymmetric due to concave right temporal region; step deformity symptom is observed in the middle of the lower right eye socket and in the area of zygomaticoalveolar crest. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Le Fort II maxillary fracture
b. Nondisplaced fracture of the temporal bone
c. Le Fort I maxillary fracture
*d. Displaced fracture of the temporal bone
e. Zygomatic arch fracture

82. A dentist diagnosed a 20-year-old patient with acute initial caries of tooth 12. What treatment is indicated in this case?
*a. Remineralizing therapy
b. ART technique
c. Enamel filing-down without filling
d. Preparation of the defect followed by its filling
e. Professional hygiene

83. After examination, an 8-year-old child was diagnosed with torsiversion of the lateral maxillary incisors and an arch-length deficiency caused by macrodontia. To prevent the vestibular position of the canines, a Hotz serial extraction was performed. In what order were the teeth removed in this case?
a. First temporary molars, temporary  canines, second premolars
b. First temporary molars, temporary  canines, first premolars
c. First temporary molars, first premolars, temporary canines
d. Second incisors, temporary canines and first temporary molar
*e. Temporary canines, first temporary  molars, first premolars

84. A 25-year-old man complains of incorrectly positioned maxillary left central incisor due to trauma sustained 2 months ago. Objectively tooth 21 is rotated around its axis into palatal position. What would be the most advisable treatment method for correction of this defect?
a. Splinting followed by prosthetic treatment
b. Surgical treatment
c. Instrumental surgical treatment
d. -
*e. Orthodontic treatment

85. During regular check-up a 6.5-year-old child presents with carious cavity on the distal proximal surface of 65 within mantle dentin. Cavity walls and bottom are pigmented, dense, painless on probing; there is no response to cold stimulus; percussion is painless. During tooth preparation there is tenderness at the level of dentinoenamel junction. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic granulating periodontitis
b. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
c. Chronic deep caries
*d. Chronic median caries
e. Acute median caries

86. A 45-year-old woman complains of burning sensations in her tongue and a metallic taste in her mouth. Three months ago, a gold dental bridge that uses teeth 16 and 14 as the abutment was made for her. Oral cavity examination detects no objective changes. Teeth 36, 37, and 46 have amalgam fillings in them. What is the most likely cause of this condition?
*a. Galvanic currents
b. Allergic reaction
c. Mechanical injury
d. Chemical factors
e. -

87. A man complains of destroyed crown of the 16 tooth. Objectively the crown portion of the 16 tooth is completely destroyed. The patient is diagnosed with chronic granulating periodontitis of the 16 tooth and this tooth needs to be extracted. What type of anesthesia should be used for this procedure?
*a. Tuberal and palatal anesthesia
b. Tuberal anesthesia
c. Tuberal and incisor anesthesia
d. Infraorbital and tuberal anesthesia
e. Infraorbital anesthesia

88. A woman came to a dentist with complaints of a formation on her face. Objectively, on the cheek there is a painless hemispherical tumor-like formation up to 1 cm in size. On palpation, the formation is dense-elastic, mobile, has a smooth surface, and is fused to the skin surface in one point at its center. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Papilloma
*b. Atheroma
c. Fibroma
d. Lymphangioma
e. Lipoma

89. A man complains of gingival pain in his upper left jaw and bleeding that occurs when he brushes his teeth or eats solid food. Objectively on the upper jaw he wears a swaged-soldered metal bridge with 14 and 16 as abutment teeth. The crown edge is pushed under the gingival margin by 0.3 mm. Intermediate part is closely fitted to the gums. The mucosa is hyperemic, swollen, interdental papillae are smoothed out; touching mucosa with a dental instrument provokes bleeding. What medical tactics should the dentist choose in the first place?
*a. Remove the dental bridge
b. Refer the patient for X-ray
c. Refer the patient for clinical blood test
d. Refer the patient for cosultation with the dental therapist
e. Make metal-fused-to-porcelain dental bridge

90. A 34-year-old man came to a dental clinic to have his tooth 38 extracted. He has an inflammatory contracture of the II degree (mouth opens by 1.5 cm). What anesthesia must be provided to eliminate the contracture in this case?
*a. Berchet-Dubov anesthesia
b. Torusal anesthesia
c. Mental anesthesia
d. Gow-Gates anesthesia
e. Mandibular anesthesia

91. A 34-year-old woman complains of dark brown spots on her upper front teeth. The spots formed approximately 18 months ago. Objectively, the contact surfaces of teeth 22 and 23 have pigmented areas of brown enamel with clear margins. Probing is painless. The surface of the spots is rough, the probe does not catch on it. After drying with a chip-blower, the surface of the spots has lost its luster and become matte. Percussion and thermodiagnostics are painless. Electric pulp testing - 4 microamperes. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Chronic superficial caries
b. Fluorosis
c. Local enamel hypoplasia
*d. Chronic initial caries
e. Tetracycline teeth

92. A 44-year-old man after an injury complains of pain in his lower jaw. The pain intensifies during lower jaw movements, especially when the man opens his mouth. Objectively, the facial configuration is disturbed, there is an extensive hematoma in the area of the left mandibular angle. Palpation of this area is painful. The lower lip frenulum is displaced to the left of the midline. When the chin is pressed, pain appears in the left mandibular angle. What is the provisional diagnosis in this case?
a. Anterior bilateral mandibular dislocation
*b. Left-sided fracture of the mandibular  angle
c. -
d. Bilateral fracture of the mandibular  ramus
e. Posterior mandibular dislocation on the  left

93. A 29-year-old woman complains of short-term pain in her front teeth, provoked by thermal, mechanical, and chemical stimuli. She has a thyroid disease. Objectively, on the vestibular surface of teeth 11, 12, 13, 21, 22, 23, 31, 32, 33, 41, 42, and 43 there are defects of hard tissues, with softened dark pigmented dentin. The enamel at the edges is chalk-colored, rough, brittle, can be chipped off with an excavator. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
*a. Necrosis of hard dental tissues
b. Cuneiform defect
c. Systemic enamel hypoplasia
d. Acute median caries
e. Erosion of hard dental tissues

94. A 18-year-old boy complains of bleeding and pain in her gums. The disease onset was 4 days ago. Objectively the skin is pale, body temperature is 38.5^oC) Her submandibular lymph nodes on the left are enlarged, painful, non-fused with the surrounding tissues. The gingival papillae and gingival margin in the area of 33, 34, 35, 36, and 37 are hyperemic, ulcerated, and covered in necrotic deposit. Teeth present with soft dental plaque. Make the diagnosis:
a. -
b. Chronic catarrhal gingivitis
c. Chronic hypertrophic gingivitis
d. Acute catarrhal gingivitis
*e. Necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis

95. When undergoing treatment of acute pulpitis of tooth 35 under infiltration anesthesia, a 26-year-old patient complained of dizziness, tinnitus, and dimming vision. Objectively, the following is observed: pale skin, cold sweat, pulse - 110/min., weak, blood pressure - 90/60 mm Hg, loss of consciousness for one minute. What complication did the patient develop during the treatment?
a. Hyperglycemic coma
*b. Syncope
c. Collapse
d. Anaphylactic shock
e. Hypoglycemic coma

96. For 2 days a man has been suffering from spontaneous nocturnal pain attacks in his tooth 25. The pain irradiates along the branches of the trigeminal nerve and alternates with brief painless intervals. Objectively, on the medial surface of tooth 25 there is a deep carious cavity within the parapulpar dentin. Probing of the cavity floor and percussion are painful. Thermal stimulation of tooth 25 provokes a pain attack. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Trigeminal neuralgia
b. Acute purulent periodontitis
c. Acute purulent pulpitis
d. Acute deep caries
*e. Acute diffuse pulpitis

97. A 62-year-old woman presents with reduced occlusal height, which makes madibular condyles press on the vault of the articular fossa, the auriculotemporal nerve, and the chorda tympani. What disease can be caused by this clinical presentation?
a. Intra-articular ankylosis
b. Juvenile temporomandibular joint dysfunction
c. Pierre Robin syndrome
*d. Costen's syndrome
e. Arthrogenic mandibular contracture

98. During the administration of a conduction anesthesia for a 15-year-old child, the child developed complaints of a hoarseness, heavy respirations, and enlarged lips and tongue. Objectively, there is an edema of the lips and tongue that is displaced posteriorly, the respirations are frequent and difficult, the voice is hoarse. What is the likely diagnosis?
a. Unconsciousness
*b. Quincke's edema
c. Anaphylactic shock
d. Collapse
e. Vertigo

99. A 35-year-old man needs an adhesive dental bridge. Objectively tooth 15 is missing. Abutment teeth 14 and 16 are firm. Teeth crowns are of medium height. Dental equator is markedly visible. The patient has orthognathic occlusion. What will most likely be an abutment part of this adhesive denture?
a. Combined crowns
b. Full cast crowns
c. Stump inlays
*d. Whole or perforated cast overlays
e. Equator crowns

100. A 55-year-old woman is undergoing a treatment for generalized parodontitis (II-III degree). In the course of treatment, it is necessary to extract a large number of teeth with III degree mobility. When should the immediate denture be installed after the operation?
a. 24 hours later
b. 2 months later
*c. The day when the teeth are extracted
d. 14 days later
e. 7 days later

101. A child is 5 years old. There are complaints of an aesthetical defect. An extraoral examination shows that the face is symmetrical, but disproportionate because of reduced lower third of the face. In the oral cavity, teeth 55, 54, 64, and 65 are lost. What dental device is necessary for this patient?
a. Frankel appliance
b. Dental bridge
*c. Removable partial denture for the upper jaw
d. Andresen-Haupl appliance
e. Clasp-retained (bugel) denture

102. A 24-year-old woman complains of a constant increasing pain in her lower right tooth that intensifies on biting. Objectively in her tooth 46 there is a carious cavity that does not communicate with the dental cavity, percussion is mildly painful, probing of cavity walls and floor is painless. X-ray imaging shows no changes. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute diffuse pulpitis
b. Acute purulent periodontitis
c. Acute local pulpitis
*d. Acute serous periodontitis
e. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis

103. The parents of a 5-year-old girl came to an orthodontist complaining that their child constantly sucks the thumb of her right hand at night. What advice should be given to the parents in this case?
a. Use a four-tailed bandage at night
b. Use a palatine plate with a reverse curve
c. Perform myogymnastic exercises for the  mandibular extensor muscles
*d. Use a fixing elbow splint
e. Use a mandibular plate with a reverse  curve

104. A 35-year-old man came to the prosthodontic clinic with complaints of teeth mobility on his lower jaw. What type of occlusion stabilization is recommended in this case?
a. Parasagittal
b. Frontal
*c. Arch
d. Frontosagittal
e. Sagittal

105. A dental bridge is being made for a 43-year-old man. Anesthesia was provided before the preparation of the abutment teeth. Two minutes later, the patient suddenly paled, broke out in cold sweat, his limbs became cold and cyanotic, he developed rapid thready pulse and muscle weakness, his blood pressure became 80/50 mm Hg. The patient is conscious but apathetic. What emergency condition has likely developed in this case?
a. Epileptic seizure
b. Hypoglycemic coma
c. Anaphylactic shock
d. Acute cerebrovascular accident
*e. Collapse

106. A 43-year-old man came to the orthopedic dental clinic with complaints of difficult chewing and aesthetical defect. Objectively, teeth 15 and 16 are lost on the upper jaw and teeth 46, 47, 48 are lost on the lower jaw. What class of partial dentition defects can be diagnosed on the jaws according to the Kennedy classification?
a. Upper jaw - class 4, lower jaw - class 2
b. Upper jaw - class 3, lower jaw - class 3
c. Upper jaw - class 2, lower jaw - class 2
d. Upper jaw - class 1, lower jaw - class 3
*e. Upper jaw - class 3, lower jaw - class 2

107. After a thorough examination, a 32-year-old patient was diagnosed with black hairy tongue syndrome. What medicines must be prescribed to this patient?
*a. Keratolytics
b. Antiviral agents
c. Keratoplastics
d. Vitamins
e. Antiseptics

108. An 18-year-old girl, having returned from a summer vacation, developed complaints of a mild pain in the lips, her lips are dry and peeling. Objectively, her lower lip is bright-red, its red border is dry and covered in small silvery-white scales. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Actinic cheilitis
b. Exfoliative cheilitis
c. Glandular glandularis
d. Chronic exematous cheilitis
e. Meteorological cheilitis

109. A 45-year-old man came to an orthopedic dentist with complaints of an aesthetic defect of the shape of his face. According to the patient, this defect was caused by a dysfunction of his maxillofacial system. Anthropometric examination shows that the upper and lower parts of his face are approximately equal in size and the straight hairline in the forehead area gives his face a square shape. What type of face is it according to Bauer?
a. Cerebral
b. Digestive
*c. Muscular
d. Progenic
e. Respiratory

110. A 21-year-old man came to the dentist complaining of general weakness, muscle pain, body temperature up to 38.3^oC, indigestion, excessive salivation, and rashes in the oral and nasal cavities, urethra, on the wings of the nose, and in the interdigital folds. These symptoms appeared after ingestion of milk during the patient's stay in the village. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Herpes zoster
b. Infectious mononucleosis
c. Behcet's disease
*d. Murrain
e. Herpetic stomatitis

111. A 34-year-old man underwent a surgical lancing of an odontogenic phlegmon in the left pterygomandibular space. He presents with further deterioration of his general condition, his body temperature increased to mbox{39-40^oC) Objectively, there are edema and crepitation in the jugular fossa and retrosternal pain that intensifies when the patient's chest is being percussed, during passive movements of the trachea, or when the patient's heels are percussed while the patient is in a horizontal position. What complication has most likely occurred in this case?
a. Phlegmon of the parapharyngeal space
*b. Anterior mediastinitis
c. Thrombosis of the cavernous sinus
d. Posterior mediastinitis
e. Phlegmon of the mouth floor

112. During examination of an 8-year-old girl, a dentist detected a deep carious cavity on the masticatory surface of tooth 36 that communicates with the pulp chamber. Probing of the junction, thermal stimulation, and percussion of the tooth are painless. Gingival mucosa in the projection of the root apices of tooth 36 is doughy and has a fistula scar. X-ray shows an irregularly-shaped focus of bone tissue destruction in the area of the unformed root apices of tooth 36. Choose the optimal material for temporary obturation of the root canals of tooth 36.
*a. Calcium hydroxide-based paste
b. Mineral trioxide aggregate-based substance
c. Zinc oxide eugenol-based paste
d. Sealer with gutta-percha
e. Phenol-based substance

113. A 67-year-old man complains of poor fixation of his full removable laminar denture for the upper jaw. He has been using this denture for 7 years. Objectively the denture balances and is poorly fixed. What tactics should the doctor choose in this case?
*a. Make a new denture
b. Change the denture base
c. File the artificial teeth in the denture for better fit
d. Make elastic lining
e. Correct the denture

114. Examination of a woman by a dentist detects marked hyperemia of her oral mucosa that in places is covered in a whitish coating that can be easily removed by scraping. Angular cheilitis is observed in the corners of her mouth. Her cervical and axillary lymph nodes are enlarged. For the last 3 months she was presenting with general weakness, temperature increasing to 37.5°С in the evening, weight loss, and prolonged diarrheas. What examination method can confirm the diagnosis in this case?
a. Lymph node biopsy
b. Inoculation to obtain blood culture
c. Microscopy of the coating
d. Complete blood count
*e. Blood test for antibodies to HIV

115. Removable complete dentures are being made for the both jaws of a 68-year-old woman. Objectively, the alveolar processes are slightly atrophied, the mucosa is moderately pliant. Anatomical impressions are obtained. What is the next stage of denture-making in this case?
a. Obtaining the functional impressions
b. Measuring the centric relation between the jaws
*c. Making of individual impression trays
d. Making of wax bases with bite blocks
e. Checking the denture construction

116. A 16-year-old girl complains of constant dull pain in her lower tooth. The pain aggravates on biting. Objectively in 46 there is a deep carious cavity communicating with the dental cavity. Comparative percussion is sharply painful. Thermal stimuli and probing are painless. Mucosa in the area of tooth 46  is markedly hyperemic, swollen, painful on palpation. X-ray shows an irregularly shaped focus of bone tissue destruction with blurred margins. Make the diagnosis:
a. Acute suppurative periodontitis
b. Exacerbation of chronic granulomatous periodontitis
c. Acute serous periodontitis
d. Exacerbation of chronic fibrous periodontitis
*e. Exacerbation of chronic granulating periodontitis

117. A 15-year-old teenager came to a dentist with complaints of swollen upper lip, pain, general weakness, and fever of 38.5^oC) The swelling appeared 3 days ago after bursting a boil. Objectively, the patient has an edema of the upper lip and hyperemic skin. There is a dense infiltrate 1.0x2.0 cm in size. The infiltrate is painful to palpation and has a purulent scab in its center. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Dermoid cyst
b. Carbuncle of the upper lip
*c. Furuncle of the upper lip
d. Atheroma of the upper lip
e. Upper lip abscess

118. A 45-year-old man came to a dentist with complains of acute paroxysmal pain in his right lower jaw. The pain radiates to the ear and intensifies when a cold stimulus is applied. Six months ago this man had a severe pain in his tooth 46, but he made no appointment with a doctor. Three days ago the pain reappeared. Examination of the mesial surface of tooth 46 revealed a deep carious cavity filled with softened pigmented dentin. Probing is sharply painful at one point. In the area of the root apices of tooth 46, X-ray shows a widening of the periodontal fissure. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Acute diffuse pulpitis
b. Acute limited pulpitis
*c. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis
d. Acute serous periodontitis
e. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis

119. A 40-year-old woman complains of sharply painful ulcers that periodically appear in her mouth throughout the last 4 years. Exacerbations of her condition occur 2-3 times a year. Examination of unchanged buccal mucosa revealed two round defects of the epithelium 5 mm in size. The defects have a hyperemic rim and grayish coating. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Chronic herpetic stomatitis
*b. Chronic recurrent aphthous stomatitis
c. Sutton's aphthae
d. Primary syphilis
e. Miliary ulcerative tuberculosis

120. A 20-year-old girl came to a dentist for a preventive examination. She has no complaints. Objectively, on the vestibular surface of her tooth 17 within the enamel there is a carious cavity with a wide opening. The enamel of the cavity walls and floor is dense and pigmented. Probing of the carious defect is painless. There is no response to thermal stimuli. Percussion of the tooth is painless. What is the diagnosis in this case?
a. Chronic initial caries
b. Chronic median caries
c. Acute initial caries
*d. Chronic superficial caries
e. Acute superficial caries

121. A 55-year-old man came to the prosthodontic clinic to have a denture made for him. Tooth 11 is missing in the patient. Two days ago he was released from the in-patient unit after a case of myocardial infarction. What tactics should the dentist choose?
*a. Make a temporary removable denture
b. Make a clasp-retained (bugel) removable partial denture
c. Temporarily refrain from making a denture
d. Make a dental bridge with 12 and 21 as abutment teeth
e. Perform implantation

122. A 37-year-old man came to a dentist with complaints of pain in his left lower jaw and reduced mouth opening. Objectively, edema and hyperemia of the mucosa are observed in the area of the left retromolar fossa that is painful to palpation. The mouth opening is reduced to 2 cm. X-ray shows dystopia of tooth 38 in the mesial direction. Make the diagnosis.
a. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of tooth 38
b. Pterygomaxillary space abscess
c. Acute odontogenic periostitis
d. Parapharyngeal space abscess
*e. Pericoronitis of tooth 38

123. A 45-year-old man came to a dentist with complaints of pain and bleeding in the area of his upper right teeth. Objectively, on the contact surfaces of teeth 16 and 17 there are dental restorations of unsatisfactory quality, the contact point of the teeth is not restored, the gingival papilla between teeth 16 and 17 is edematous, hyperemic, and bleeds when probed. X-ray shows resorption of the interalveolar septum in the area of teeth 16 and 17 by 1/3 of their root length. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Chronic hypertrophic gingivitis, degree I
b. Acute catarrhal gingivitis
*c. Localized periodontitis
d. Generalized periodontitis, degree I
e. Chronic catarrhal gingivitis

124. An 18-year-old young man complains of a cavity in his tooth 37 and pain that occurs when food gets into this cavity. The tooth was painful one year ago but he did not make an appointment with the doctor back then. Objectively, on the masticatory surface of tooth 37 there is a deep carious cavity that communicates with the pulp chamber. Overgrown granulation tissue protrudes from the perforation into the pulp chamber and fills practically the whole carious cavity. Probing of the granulations provokes bleeding and slight pain. Percussion is painless. Mucosa in the projection of the roots of tooth 37 is pale pink and has no pathologic changes. Electric pulp testing - 60 microamperes. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
b. Chronic granulating periodontitis
*c. Chronic hypertrophic pulpitis
d. Granulations from the area of root  bifurcation
e. Hypertrophic papillitis

125. As a result of a trauma, an upper front tooth was broken in a 39-year-old patient. Objectively, the cutting edge on the mesial surface of tooth 22 is destroyed, with the area of destruction remaining within the mantle dentin. What class of cavity is it according to the Black's classification?
a. III
b. VI
c. V
*d. IV
e. II

126. A 42-year-old woman complains of sharp pain in her right temporomandibular joint. The pain intensifies during lower jaw movements. Three days ago, she was injured (fell and hit her chin on a hard object). Objectively, her face is symmetrical, the bite is orthognathic, the mouth opening is limited to 2 cm. X-ray shows smooth and straight contours of the bone tissues of the articular surfaces. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Rheumatic arthritis of the  temporomandibular joint
b. Pain dysfunction of the right  temporomandibular joint
c. Ankylosis of the right  temporomandibular joint
*d. Acute post-traumatic arthritis of the right temporomandibular joint
e. Right-sided anterior dislocation of the  mandible

127. A 54-year-old man came to a dentist for oral cavity sanation. He has a single small erosion on the vermilion border of his lower lip, located laterally at the distance of 1/3 from the right mouth angle. The erosion has an irregular shape, deep red color, and a smooth glossy surface. Palpation detects no induration of its base, regional lymph nodes are not palpable. The lesion first appeared 3 years ago. Usually, it is observed for 1.5-2 months, then it heals and reappears. Sometimes it is covered in a scab. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
*a. Manganotti's abrasive precancerous  cheilitis
b. Recurrent herpes
c. Bowen's disease
d. Leukoplakia, erosive form
e. Primary syphiloma, erosive form

128. A 44-year-old man came to a dentist for sanation of the oral cavity. Objectively, the crown of his tooth 17 is completely destroyed. Having conducted additional examinations, the dentist made the following diagnosis: chronic fibrous periodontitis of tooth 17. Extraction of tooth 17 is indicated in this case. What type of conduction anesthesia should be used for the tooth extraction in this case?
a. Torusal anesthesia
b. Plexual anesthesia
c. Incisor and infraorbital anesthesia
*d. Tuberal and palatine anesthesia
e. Infraorbital and palatine anesthesia

129. The parents of a 6-year-old boy complain of an edema on the right side of the child's face, a fever of 39^oC, and a deterioration of his general condition. Objectively, the child's face is asymmetrical because of a soft tissue edema in the buccal and submandibular areas on the right. In the oral cavity, the crown of tooth 84 is destroyed, percussion of teeth 83, 84 and 85 is painful, the teeth have the mbox{I-II degree of mobility, the alveolar mucosa of the right lower jaw is hyperemic and edematous on its lingual and vestibular sides. Vincent's sign is positive. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis  of tooth 84
b. Acute odontogenic periostitis
*c. Acute odontogenic osteomyelitis
d. Phlegmon of the right submandibular  region
e. Acute odontogenic purulent  lymphadenitis

130. A 40-year-old woman came to a dentist to have dentures made for her teeth 12 and 13. These teeth are pink and were previously treated. After examination, a porcelain-fused-to-metal design of crowns was selected. No contraindications were found for the use of such dentures by the patient. What material must be used to obtain a working cast?
a. Orthocor
*b. Speedex
c. Stomalgin
d. Plaster
e. Repin

131. A 15-year-old girl complains of enlarged gums in the area of her upper and lower front teeth. Objectively, the gums are hypertrophied, loose, and bleeding. False periodontal pockets are observed. The girl was provisionally diagnosed with hypertrophic gingivitis. The proliferative processes in the patient's gums are most likely to be associated with:
a. Unsatisfactory oral hygiene
b. Hypovitaminosis
c. Endocrine diseases
d. Diseases of the digestive system
*e. Hormonal dysfunction

132. A 69-year-old woman complains of dry mouth and burning pain in her oral cavity. For the last 2 years she has been using removable laminar dentures. The mucosa of the hard palate and tongue dorsum is bright red, hyperemic, and edematous. Within the prosthetic bed there is a small amount of easily removable gray-white plaque. What medicines are used for the etiotropic treatment of this disease?
*a. Antifungal agents
b. Antibiotics
c. Antiprotozoal agents
d. Antiviral agents
e. Anti-inflammatory agents

133. A 20-year-old woman complains of pain in the area of tooth 38. The pain increases during swallowing and opening her mouth wide. Objectively, the crown of tooth 38 is partially covered in mucosa, from under which a purulent exudate is being discharged. Palpation is painful. The mucosa over tooth 38 is hyperemic and swollen. Make the provisional diagnosis:
*a. Acute suppurative pericoronitis
b. Acute suppurative periostitis
c. Acute ulcerative pericoronitis
d. Acute serous periostitis
e. Acute catarrhal pericoronitis

134. A 43-year-old man complains of a periodic feeling of heaviness in his right buccal region and a salty taste in his mouth with frequent exacerbations. Objectively, his parotid salivary gland on the right is dense, elastic, springy, and painless. Thick saliva with translucent mucus inclusions is being secreted from the duct opening. The sialogram revealed numerous small cavities in the parenchyma of the gland. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Herzenberg's parotitis
*b. Chronic parenchymal parotitis
c. Chronic interstitial parotitis
d. Sjogren's syndrome
e. Pleomorphic adenoma of the parotid gland

135. A 42-year-old man came to the prosthodontic clinic. He complains of inability to chew his food due to partial loss of teeth. Objectively in the lateral regions teeth 18, 16, 15, 25, 26, 28, 38, 35, 36, 44, 46, 48 are missing. Other teeth present with I-II degrees of mobility. The patient is diagnosed with generalized periodontitis of the II degree. What type of denture would be optimal for this patient?
a. Metal-based dentures
b. -
*c. Clasp-retained (bugel) dentures with splinting elements
d. Removable partial laminar denture
e. Non-removable full cast dental bridges

136. A 42-year-old man came to the prosthodontics clinic to have dental prosthesis made for him. Objectively teeth 34, 35, 36, 43, and 16 are absent in this patient. During examination alginate impressions for diagnostic models were obtained. What should be used for disinfection of obtained impressions?
a. 3% hydrogen peroxide solution
b. 10% hydrogen peroxide solution
c. 3% sodium hypochlorite solution
*d. 0.5% sodium hypochlorite solution
e. Sterillium

137. Complete removable laminar dentures are being made for a patient. Objectively, the alveolar processes of the jaws are mildly atrophied, the mucosa is moderately pliable. Anatomical impressions were obtained. What is the next clinical stage of denture-making?
*a. Obtaining functional impressions
b. Checking the wax models of the dentures
c. Making individual impression trays
d. Determining the central ratio of the jaws
e. Checking the placement of the teeth

138. A 12-year-old girl complains of general weakness, high temperature, and swelling of the face on both sides. She has been ill for two days. In the school where the child studies, some students have similar complaints. Examination detects the following: body temperature - 38.5°С, swelling of both parotid salivary glands, the skin over the glands is not discolored, palpation is painful, especially when pressing in the area of the mastoid processes. The mucosa in the area of the salivary gland openings is edematous and hyperemic. Salivation is reduced. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Herzenberg's pseudoparotitis
b. Concrementous sialadenitis
*c. Acute epidemic parotitis
d. Exacerbation of chronic parenchymal parotitis
e. Acute bacterial parotitis

139. A 56-year-old man during obtaining a full anatomical impression of the upper jaw with alginate mass developed acute dyspnea, pale skin, increased sweating, cyanosis, and wheezing respirations. What urgent condition developed in this case?
a. Pneumothorax
b. Acute bronchitis
*c. Aspiration asphyxia
d. Overactive gag reflex
e. Bronchial asthma attack

140. The parents of a 5-year-old child explain that lately their child has started chewing only on one side and refusing hard foods. Objectively, tooth 74 has a carious cavity and there are dental deposits on teeth 73, 74, and 75. Probing of the cavity floor in tooth 74 is painful and provokes a slight bleeding in the area where the cavity communicates with the pulp chamber. Make the diagnosis:
a. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis
b. Acute deep caries
c. Acute median caries
*d. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
e. Chronic hypertrophic pulpitis

141. Complete removable dentures are being made for the upper and lower jaws of a 67-year-old patient. To place the artificial teeth correctly, the movements of the lower jaw were recorded. What is the average angle of the sagittal joint path?
a. 12°
b. 110°
c. 17°
*d. 33°
e. 63°

142. A dental orthodontist has prescribed a complex of myogymnastic exercises with an equilibrator to an 8-year-old boy with the Angle's class II, subclass 1, closure of the first permanent molars. What muscle is trained using this dental appliance?
a. Tongue muscles
*b. Orbicularis oris muscle
c. Pharyngeal muscles
d. Mandibular elevator muscles
e. Respiratory muscles

143. A 58-year-old woman complains of a red spot on her lower lip that first appeared 4 years ago. Objectively, on the vermillion border of the lower lip there is a red spot with velvety surface. The lesion is slightly concave, when compared to the surrounding tissues. It does not change its color when pressed. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Verrucous precancer
b. Simple leukoplakia
c. Hemangioma
*d. Bowen's disease
e. Exfoliative cheilitis

144. A 54-year-old man with completely edentulous jaws was diagnosed with a non-displaced midline mandibular fracture. A few days after applying a Port splint, the patient developed complaints of intense pain in the area of the mandibular condyles of his temporomandibular joint. What is the most likely cause of these complaints?
a. Incorrect splint design was chosen
b. Deepened bite
*c. Raised bite
d. Displaced mandible
e. -

145. A 54-year-old woman complains of a neoplasm on her lower lip that appeared 6 month ago. Twenty days ago it suddenly started growing rapidly. Objectively, on the vermillion border of the lower lip there is a round red-gray node that rises 0.5 cm above the underlaying tissues. It is distinguished from the surrounding tissues and has a funnelform depression in its center, filled with keratinized masses. On palpation, the nodule is dense, mobile, and painless. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Manganotti's cheilitis
b. Verrucous leukoplakia
c. Verrucous precancer
d. Papilloma
*e. Keratoacanthoma

146. A 47-year-old man underwent an unsuccessful conservative treatment of chronic granulating periodontitis of tooth 15. After that he was referred for the tooth extraction. What forceps should be used to extract this tooth?
a. S-shaped right-sided forceps
*b. S-shaped forceps
c. S-shaped left-sided forceps
d. Bayonet forceps
e. Straight forceps

147. A 29-year-old man came to a dentist to have a denture made for him. He complains of frequent destruction of dental restorations in his upper front tooth. Objectively, his tooth 11 is restored with a filling material to 2/3 of its coronal portion; thermal stimulation and percussion are painless. What type of orthopedic installation is indicated in this case?
a. Swaged metal crown
b. Crown made using the Belkin technique
c. Plastic crown
*d. Porcelain-fused-to-metal crown
e. Telescopic crown

148. What can be determined by studying the jaw casts during the period of permanent bite using the Korkhaus technique?
a. Incorrect placement of the lateral teeth in the dentition in the sagittal and transversal directions
b. Dentition dimensions in the transversal plane
*c. The length of the front segment of the upper and lower dentitions in the sagittal direction
d. Longitudinal length of the dentitions
e. The ratio of the width of the transverse dimensions of the upper and lower incisors

149. An 11-year-old child presents with protrusion of the upper front teeth, there are tremata and diastema between the child's teeth. What apparatus can be used for treatment of this pathology?
*a. Osadchy
b. Brukle
c. Mershon
d. Frankel, type 3
e. Vasylenko

150. When fitting the metallic frame of a porcelain-fused-to-metal dental bridge, it was determined that in the central occlusion the frame is in a contact with the antagonist teeth. It reaches the ledges of the abutment teeth and is 0.3 mm thick. What tactics should a dentist choose?
a. Send the frame to the next laboratory stage of the denture-making
b. Obtain an impression with the frame  fitted into the oral cavity
*c. Complete the preparation of the  abutment teeth and make a working impression
d. Determine the areas that prevent  normal installation of the dental bridge
e. File down the metallic frame in the areas of its contact with the antagonist teeth

151. A 2.5-year-old child is registered for regular check-ups with the orthodontist. The I stage of physiogical occlusion development corresponds with eruption of the following group of temporary teeth:
a. Temporary molars
b. Temporary lateral incisors
c. Front teeth
d. Temporary canines
e. Temporary central incisors

152. A 26-year-old man came to a dentist for oral cavity sanation. Objective examination of tooth 16 revealed on its masticatory surface a hard tissue defect  within the mantle dentin. The dentin is dense and pigmented. Probing, thermal testing, and percussion are painless. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Acute median caries
b. Chronic deep caries
c. Chronic superficial caries
d. Acute deep caries
e. Chronic median caries

153. The mother of a 4-year-old girl complains that her child has fever of 39^oC, cough, and runny nose. Examination of the oral cavity detects punctate whitish spots that resemble splashes of lime on the hyperemic buccal mucosa in the area of the molars. Palpation of the affected areas detects a mucosal unevenness. Regional lymph nodes are enlarged. What is the provisional diagnosis in this case?
a. Measles
b. Infectious mononucleosis
c. Varicella
d. Erythema multiforme exudativum
e. Acute herpetic stomatitis

154. A 25-year-old woman complains of acute and prolonged pain attacks in the area of her right lower jaw. The pain attacks can be provoked by various stimuli, pain also occurs spontaneously at night and radiates into the right ear. After a clinical examination, a diagnosis of acute diffuse pulpitis of tooth 46 was established. What is the most common route of infection spreading into the pulp?
a. Hematogenous infection through the root apex
b. Lymphogenous infection through the root apex
c. From the carious cavity along the dentinal tubules
d. Through the branching delta of the root canal
e. In retrograde, through the apical foramen

155. Parents of a 5-year-old child came to the dentist for sanation of the child's oral cavity. Objectively on the masticatory surfaces of teeth 54, 64, 74, 75, and 85 there are carious cavities within the softened mantle dentin. The child is anxious and misbehaves. What treatment tactics would be optimal in this case?
a. Deep fluoridation
b. Preventive filling
c. Impregnation treatment
d. Invasive sealing
e. ART technique

156. During his shift a dentist of the prosthodontics unit has consulted and examined the patient, checked the crowns, installed dental bridges, measured centric jaw relation, and made necessary corrections to the removable dentures. What is the normal workload of a dentist per shift and per month measured in arbitrary units of labor intensity (AU) in a five-day work week and according to the normatives for provision of healthcare to the adults?
a. 9 AU - 189 AU
b. 5 AU - 105 AU
c. 6 AU - 126 AU
d. 7 AU - 147 AU
e. 8 AU - 168 AU

157. Teeth 71 and 81 erupted in a 6-year-old child, the lower jaw is retrogenic, the palate is flat with pronounced cross-folds. Determine the condition of the oral cavity:
a. Decompensated
b. Pathologic
c. Abnormal
d. Physiologic
e. Subcompensated

158. A 5-year-old girl has a round soft elastic neoplasm up to 2 cm in diameter on the front surface of her neck on the midline. The neoplasm is painless to palpation and moves upwards during swallowing. This formation has been slowly growing over the course of the last 2 years. Make the provisional diagnosis.
a. Retention cyst of a sublingual salivary gland
b. Chronic hyperplastic lymphadenitis
c. Cervical dermoid cyst
d. Midline cervical cyst
e. Cyst of a submandibular salivary gland

159. To make the external prosthesis for a 62-year-old man it is necessary to obtain a Hippocrates facial moulage of this patient. What impression material should be used?
a. Repin
b. Stomaflex
c. Stens
d. Plaster
e. Dentafol

160. A 23-year-old man with an asthenic built came to a dental surgeon for the planned extraction of tooth 18. During the objective examination, the patient complained of general weakness, nausea, and darkened vision and lost his consciousness for several seconds. The skin of his face is pale and covered in sweat, the pulse is thready, the blood pressure is 110/70 mm Hg. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Collapse
b. Syncope
c. Quincke's edema
d. Anaphylactic shock
e. Epilepsy attack

161. A 51-year-old woman complains of dry mouth, distorted sense of taste, and burning and tingling in the back and sides of her tongue, which disappears during eating, but intensifies in the evening. Such sensations first appeared one year ago after a mental trauma. Over time the sensations intensify. The woman suffers from anacid gastritis, diabetes mellitus, and disturbed sleep. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Candidal glossitis
b. Desquamative glossitis
c. Moeller-Hunter glossitis
d. Glossodynia
e. Ganglionitis of the sublingual ganglia

162. When receiving tuberal anesthesia intraorally, a man developed a rapidly progressing edema of the left cheek that soon spread to the temporal region. What complication has likely occurred in this case?
a. Quincke's edema
b. Hematoma
c. Emphysema
d. Ischemia
e. Abscess

163. A 33-year-old man complains of paroxysmal pain in his upper left tooth. The pain intensifies at night and in response to various stimuli and radiates into the left temple and eye. Similar pain attacks were occurring three months ago, but the patient did not consult a doctor. Objectively, tooth 25 has a deep carious cavity that communicates with the pulp chamber. Probing at the point of communication is sharply painful, percussion is mildly painful. Mucosa in the area of the root apex projection of tooth 25 is unchanged. Thermodiagnostics is markedly positive, the pain attack is long-lasting. Electric pulp testing - 60 microamperes. X-ray shows slight widening of the periodontal fissure near the root apex of tooth 25. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Acute serous periodontitis
b. Acute purulent pulpitis
c. Acute diffuse pulpitis
d. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
e. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis

164. A removable partial laminar denture was made for the upper jaw of a 55-year-old patient. During assessment of its quality, small pores were detected all throughout the denture base. What has caused the formation of pores in the denture?
a. Insufficient amount of monomer in the plastic dough
b. Insufficient pressure applied to the plastic during its polymerization
c. Using plastic with an expired expiration date
d. Rapid temperature increase during plastic polymerization
e. Rapid cooling of the cuvette after plastic polymerization

165. A 12-year-old boy complains of constant intense throbbing toothache, aggravated by biting on the affected tooth. The pain appeared 4 days ago. Objectively, submandibular lymph nodes are enlarged and painful to palpation; tooth 26 has a deep carious cavity that does not communicate with the dental cavity. Thermal stimulation and probing of the cavity floor are painless, percussion is sharply painful, the tooth is mobile, the mucosa in the area of tooth 26 is hyperemic and edematous. During the necrectomy, the dental cavity was opened and a drop of exudate was obtained. X-ray shows no pathological changes in tooth 26. What is the most likely diagnosis in this   case?
a. Acute purulent pulpitis
b. Acute purulent periodontitis
c. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
d. Acute serous periodontitis
e. Acute odontogenic periostitis

166. A 27-year-old woman needs a denture. Objectively, her tooth 15 is missing, while teeth 14 and 16 are intact. What denture is preferable in this case?
a. Adhesive dental bridge
b. Porcelain-fused-to-metal dental bridge
c. Partial removable laminar denture
d. Swaged dental bridge
e. Clasp (bugel) denture

167. What anatomical landmarks are used to locate the mandibular foramen, when administering mandibular anesthesia intraorally in a 6-year-old child?
a. At the level of the masticatory surface of a lower temporary molar
b. 10 mm below the masticatory surface of the last lower molar
c. 6 mm above the masticatory surface of the last lower molar
d. 10 mm above the masticatory surface of the last lower molar
e. 5 mm below the level of the lower alveolar ridge

168. A 5-year-old child has all temporary teeth in the oral cavity with tremas between them. The incisors are in direct contact and their cutting edges are worn off. The distal surfaces of two temporary molars form a mesio-sagittal step - the Zielinsky sign. What period of bite formation is it?
a. Late transitional dentition
b. Early transitional dentition
c. Aging of the temporary bite
d. Formation of the temporary bite
e. Stabilization of the temporary bite

169. A 60-year-old man came to a dentist with complaints of aesthetic defects in his upper front teeth. The defects started manifesting approximately 10 years ago. Objectively, the pericervical regions of the vestibular surfaces of teeth 13, 12, 11, 21, 22, and 23 have defects of dental hard tissues within the mantle dentin in the form of two planes converging at an angle. The walls and floor of the defects are dense, smooth, glossy, with even edges. Probing is painless. The defects do not stain with methylene blue. Make the diagnosis.
a. Enamel erosion
b. Chronic median caries
c. Pathological tooth wear
d. Systemic enamel hypoplasia
e. Cuneiform defects

170. The hospital received a 19-year-old patient injured in a landmine explosion with an open displaced mandibular fracture in the area of the left mandibular angle and a contused lacerated wound of the left submandibular area. The patient is in moderately severe condition, pulse is 80/min., blood pressure is 110/80 mm Hg. What anesthesia should be given to the patient for initial surgical d-bridement?
a. Conduction anesthesia with premedication
b. Endotracheal anesthesia
c. Neuroleptanalgesia
d. Conduction anesthesia
e. Intravenous anesthesia

171. A patient undergoes endodontic treatment of tooth 11. The doctor has performed instrumental treatment of the root canal. The method of warm vertical condensation of gutta-percha was chosen for the canal sealing. What instrument must be used for the filler condensing in this case?
a. Root needle
b. Spreader
c. Gutta-percha condenser
d. Plugger
e. K-file

172. A 42-year-old woman came to a dentist. The doctor noted that her respiration became deep and noisy. Objectively, she presents with pallor, dry skin and mucosa, decreased skin turgor, soft eyeballs, weak pupillary response to light, deep and loud breathing, acetone smell from the mouth, weak pulse (70/min.), and blood pressure of 80/40 mm Hg. The patient has a history of diabetes mellitus. What emergency condition did she develop in this case?
a. Bronchial asthma attack
b. Acute myocardial infarction
c. Hypoglycemic coma
d. Epileptic seizure
e. Hyperglycemic coma

173. A 45-year-old woman diagnosed with thrombophlebitis of the angular vein of the face developed exophthalmos. What does this symptom indicate?
a. Development of periphlebitis
b. Spread of the inflammatory process into the pterygopalatine fossa
c. Spread of the inflammatory process into the retrobulbar fat
d. Suppuration of the angular vein of the face
e. Development of purulent meningitis as a complication of thrombophlebitis

174. After examination, a 34-year-old patient was diagnosed with Melkersson-Rosenthal syndrome. What complex of symptoms is characteristic of this syndrome?
a. Lichen ruber planus, essential hypertension, diabetes mellitus
b. Hutchinson's teeth, congenital deafness, congenital blindness
c. Macrocheilitis, fissured tongue, paresis of the facial nerve
d. Median rhomboid glossitis, eczematous cheilitis, paresis of the facial nerve
e. Fissured tongue, atopic cheilitis, trigeminal neuritis

175. Medical committee registers the patients, who for a long time lived in an area polluted with radiation. The patients are advised on the diet that will quickly purge the body from radionuclides. The portion of products rich in pectine should be increased in their diet. Name these products:
a. Pasta
b. Fruits and vegetables
c. Dairy products
d. Baked goods
e. Meat products

176. A 58-year-old woman came to an orthopedic dentist complaining that her partial removable denture for the upper jaw had broken. She had been using this denture for 2 years. The denture base is broken. What plastic must be used to repair the denture?
a. Ethacryl
b. Carboplast
c. Stomaplast
d. Redont
e. Phthorax

177. A 32-year-old man has been brought into the maxillofacial department of a clinic. He was diagnosed with an open displaced bilateral fracture of the lower jaw in the area of the gonial angle. X-ray shows a large diastasis between the fragments and muscle interposition. What main treatment technique should be chosen for this patient?
a. Apply a splint with wire loops to the  lower jaw
b. Apply a smooth splint-bracket
c. Bilateral osteosynthesis of the lower jaw
d. Make a Vankevich splint for the fixation of the lower jaw
e. Make a Port splint for the fixation of the lower jaw

178. A 40-year-old man came to a dental surgeon for extraction of tooth 16. The crown of tooth 16 is retained. What forceps should be used to extract tooth 16 in this case?
a. Straight forceps
b. S-shaped forceps
c. S-shaped right-sided forceps
d. Bayonet crown forceps
e. S-shaped left-sided forceps

179. A 7-year-old practically healthy child was undergoing the carious cavity preparation of tooth 46 due to acute median caries. During this procedure the mesio-buccal pulp horn was accidentally exposed. What treatment would be optimal in this case?
a. Vital amputation
b. Biological approach
c. Devital extirpation
d. Vital extirpation
e. Devital amputation

180. A 38-year-old man complains of a fever of 40°С and constant pain in his right lower jaw that radiates to the neighboring areas. Objectively, he has edema of soft tissues around the body of the mandible on the right, the skin is hyperemic. The mouth opening is reduced, the oral mucosa is edematous and hyperemic on both sides of the alveolar process in the area of teeth 45, 46, 47. The crown of tooth 46 is completely destroyed. Percussion of teeth 45, 46, 47 is painful, the teeth are mobile. Make the provisional diagnosis.
a. Acute odontogenic periostitis
b. Acute purulent odontogenic lymphadenitis
c. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of tooth 46
d. Acute odontogenic osteomyelitis
e. Odontogenic abscess of the right submandibular area

181. A 2.5-year-old child is fussy and refuses to eat because of pain in the mouth that lasts for several days already. The body temperature is 37.2^oC) The child has pneumonia and is being treated in an inpatient department. Objectively, on the hyperemic and edematous mucosa of the cheeks, palate, and tongue, there is a white film that can be easily removed, with the formation of erosions in some areas. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Acute herpetic stomatitis
b. Mild leukoplakia
c. Vincent's necrotizing ulcerative stomatitis
d. Erythema multiforme exudativum
e. Acute candidal stomatitis

182. The anatomo-physiological method was applied to determine the interalveolar height of a 65-year-old man with completely edentulous jaws. How does the distance between the control points on the chin and at the nasal base differ in this case from the physiological resting state of the lower jaw?
a. It is 5-6 mm longer
b. It is 2-3 mm shorter
c. It is 5-6 mm shorter
d. The distance is the same
e. It is 2-3 mm longer

183. An 8-year-old boy complains of a dull pain in his lower right tooth. The pain appears in response to thermal stimuli and slowly abates after the stimuli are removed. Objectively on the approximal surface of tooth 46 there is a deep carious cavity. During necrectomy with a dental excavator, communication between the carious and dental cavities is detected. Probing of the communication area results in sharp pain and bleeding. What method of pulpitis treatment is recommended in this case?
a. Biological approach
b. Devital extirpation
c. Vital amputation
d. Vital extirpation
e. Devital amputation

184. A 48-year-old man complains of disturbed lower jaw mobility. The condition developed gradually, starting with the deterioration of lower jaw mobility and its stiffness. X-ray of the temporomandibular joint, with scans taken on the left and on the right both with the mouth open and closed, shows exophytes on the articular surfaces. What disease can be characterized by these changes?
a. Acute arthritis
b. Chronic arthritis
c. Fibrous ankylosis
d. Arthrosis
e. Habitual mandibular dislocation

185. A new dental polyclinic is being opened in the city. There are to be 38 doctors in the dental surgery department. How many department heads should supervise this number of personnel according to the normatives?
a. 4
b. 5
c. 2
d. 3
e. 1

186. A 13-year-old boy complains of his gums bleeding when he brushes his teeth and constant aching pain during eating, especially solid foods. Objectively, hyperemia and edema of the gingival margin is observed in the upper and lower front teeth, there are no periodontal pockets. X-ray detects no pathological changes in the bone tissue of the alveolar process of the jaws. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Chronic hypertrophic gingivitis
b. Acute catarrhal gingivitis
c. Chronic catarrhal gingivitis
d. Localized parodontitis
e. Generalized parodontitis, initial stage, chronic course

187. What drugs are not used for premedication in dentistry?
a. Psychostimulants and adaptogens
b. Antihistamines
c. Analgesics
d. Sedatives
e. Muscarinic antagonists

188. A 42-year-old man was delivered to the hospital in the severe condition: inert, body temperature is 39.1^oC, there is acutely painful infiltration of the mouth floor and submandibular area on the right. The skin over the infiltration is turgid and cyanotic. Palpation detects crepitus under the skin. What diagnosis can be made in this case?
a. Actinomycosis of the mouth floor
b. Odontogenic phlegmon of the mouth floor
c. Ludwig's angina (suppurative-necrotic phlegmon of the mouth floor)
d. Malignant tumor of the mouth floor
e. Adenophlegmon of the mouth floor

189. A 42-year-old woman complains of swelling and purulent discharge from a fistula in the left parotid region and limited mouth opening. Objectively, her face is asymmetrical due to an infiltration in the left parotid region. The infiltration is cyanotic, has ''wooden'' density, and contains fistulas that produce crumbs of yellowish pus. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Herzenberg's mumps
b. Adenophlegmon
c. Tuberculosis
d. Odontogenic subcutaneous granuloma
e. Actinomycosis

190. A 36-year-old man complains of an ulcer on his lower left lip. Three weeks ago a smal round red spot appeared on his lip. Eventually it became more dense and noticeable and 2-3 days ago developed an ulcer in its center, while under the lower jaw appeared multiple painless nodules. Objectively on the mucosa of the lower left lip there is an oval ulcer, 1.2 cm in diameter, with smooth clear margins and bright-red glossy floor. Ulcer edges form a cushion that smoothly descends to the bottom of the ulcer. In the base of the ulcer there is a dense painless infiltration. Submandibular lymph nodes are enlarged and painless, the skin over them remains unchanged. This clinical presentation corresponds with the following disease:
a. Trophic ulcer
b. Lupus erythematosus
c. Ulcerative cheilitis
d. Lip cancer
e. Syphilis (initial period)

191. A 2-year-old girl has a bright red neoplasm 1x1.5 cm in size on her upper lip. The neoplasm does not protrude above the mucosa and becomes paler, when pressed. The regional lymph nodes have no pathology. The results of blood and urine analysis are normal for her age. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Capillary hemangioma
b. Cavernous hemangioma
c. Systemic hemangiomatosis
d. Capillary lymphangioma
e. Cavernous lymphangioma

192. During examination of a 5-year-old boy, the dentist detected a deep carious cavity communicating with the pulp chamber in tooth 84. Probing of the junction, thermal stimulation, and percussion of the tooth are painless. Gingival mucosa in the area of the root apices projection of tooth 84 is doughy and has a fistula scar. X-ray shows an irregularly-shaped focus of bone tissue destruction in the apical part of the distal root. Choose the optimal material for permanent obturation of the root canals of tooth 84.
a. Mineral trioxide aggregate material
b. Calcium hydroxide paste
c. Epoxy resin paste
d. Zinc oxide and eugenol paste
e. Phenol-based material

193. A 60-year-old woman came to a dental surgeon to have her central upper incisors extracted. The crown part of the incisors is retained. What forceps are needed to extract these teeth?
a. S-shaped right-sided forceps
b. S-shaped forceps
c. Beak-shaped crown forceps without  spikes
d. Straight forceps
e. Bayonet forceps

194. To clarify the diagnosis, the orthodontist performed Eschler-Bittner clinical diagnostic test. As the result the facial signs became more marked. What jaw abnormality is the most likely in this case?
a. Mandibular macrognathia
b. Maxillary micrognathia
c. Mandibular micrognathia
d. Combined pathology of both jaws
e. Maxillary macrognathia

195. A removable partial denture has been made for the upper jaw of a 58-year-old man. During the assessment of its quality, small bubble pores were detected throughout the whole denture base. What has caused the formation of pores in this case?
a. Rapid cooling of the cuvette after the  plastic polymerization
b. Excessice plastic thickness
c. Use of expired plastic
d. Rapid temperature increase during the  plastic polymerization
e. Insufficient plastic thickness

196. A 25-year-old woman came to a dentist with complaints of increased sensitivity to thermal and chemical stimuli in the area of her upper lateral teeth on the left. Objectively, in the pericervical area of the vestibular surface of tooth 26, there is a chalk-like spot with a shallow defect in its center. When stained with a 3% solution of methylene blue, the enamel in the area of the spot stains blue. The affected area is tender when probed. What is the likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Enamel erosion
b. Cuneiform defect
c. Acute superficial caries
d. Enamel necrosis
e. Local enamel hypoplasia

197. A 20-year-old pregnant woman with the term of 22 weeks complains of thermal sensitivity of her upper front teeth. The sensitivity developed one month ago. She was diagnosed with acute initial caries of teeth 12, 11, 21, 22, Black class V. Fedorov-Volodkina hygiene index is 1.8. What treatment tactics would be optimal in this case?
a. Remineralization therapy and filling of teeth 12, 11, 21, and 22
b. Professional teeth cleaning and filling of teeth 12, 11, 21, and 22
c. Postpone the treatment until 30 weeks of gestation
d. Professional teeth cleaning and remineralization therapy
e. Professional teeth cleaning, remineralization therapy, and filling of teeth 12, 11, 21, and 22

198. A 28-year-old man complains of painless sore in his mouth that persists despite the attempts at self-treatment. Objectively the regional lymph nodes on the left are enlarged and painless. Mucosa of the left cheek presents with round ulcer, 1 cm in diameter, with raised margins and cartilage-like infiltration in its basis. The surface of the ulcer is colored meat red and painless on palpation. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Secondary syphilis
b. Cancer
c. Lupus vulgaris
d. Primary syphilis
e. Decubitus ulcer

199. A person has a unilateral linear fracture in the area of the gonial angle. Immobilization was performed by applying a two-jaw dental ligature splint with anchoring loops and intermaxillary traction. Healing progresses without complications. When is it the time to remove the splint?
a. In 10 days
b. In 5 weeks
c. In 3 weeks
d. In 2 weeks
e. In 7 days

