1. A 55-year-old man on the 3rd day after an acute anterior myocardial infarction complains of shortness of breath and a dull pain behind the sternum that decreases when he leans forward. Objectively, his blood pressure is 140/80 mm Hg and his heart sounds are muffled. ECG shows atrial fibrillation with the ventricular rate of 110/min., pathological Q wave, and ST segment elevation in the right-sided chest leads. Make the diagnosis:
a. Dressler syndrome
*b. Acute pericarditis
c. Pulmonary embolism
d. Tietze syndrome
e. Dissecting aortic aneurysm

2. A 60-year-old man complains of mild disturbances of memory, coordination, gait. Cerebral atherosclerosis was confirmed. Blood pressure is within the norm. Magnetic resonance imaging shows leukoaraiosis in the periventricular area. What is the most likley diagnosis?
a. Transient ischemic attacks
*b. Hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy
c. Alzheimer's disease
d. Lacunar cerebral stroke
e. Binswanger's disease (subcortical arteriosclerotic encephalopathy)

3. A 63-year-old woman has undergone a surgery for a large multinodular euthyroid goiter. With technical difficulties, a subtotal resection of both lobes of the thyroid gland was performed. On the fourth day after the surgery, the patient developed abdominal pain and muscle spasms in her face and arms. Chvostek and Trousseau signs are positive. What is the most likely cause of the patient's condition?
a. Thyrotoxic crisis
b. Tracheomalacia
c. Postoperative hypothyroidism
*d. Hypoparathyroidism
e. Damage to the recurrent laryngeal nerve

4. A 25-year-old woman complains of menstruation retention lasting for 3 years. The patient explains it by a difficult childbirth complicated with profuse hemorrhage, weight loss, brittleness and loss of hair, loss of appetite, depression. Objective examination reveals no pathologic changes of uterus and uterine appendages. What pathogenesis is characteristic of this disorder?
*a. Decreased production of gonadotropin
b. Hyperproduction of prolactin
c. Hyperproduction of androgen
d. Decreased production of progesterone
e. Hyperproduction of estrogen

5. A 27-year-old woman complains of foul-smelling discharge from her genital tracts, pain in her lower abdomen, and elevated temperature. The complaints arose 2 days ago. She has a history of surgical abortion at the term of 8 weeks one week ago. Mirror examination: the uterine cervix is clear, external orifice produces foul-smelling discharge. Vaginal examination: the uterus lies in anteflexion, is mobile, painful, and slightly enlarged. The appendages are without changes. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Appendicitis
b. Acute respiratory disease
c. Salpingoophoritis
*d. Postabortal endometritis
e. Enterocolitis

6. Among the population living near a pesticide production factory, the number of congenital malformations that manifest as central paralysis, idiocy, and blindness of newborns is dynamically increasing. Compounds of what chemical substance can cause the development of these pathologies?
a. Iron
*b. Mercury
c. Cadmium
d. Chrome
e. Strontium

7. The region at the Carpathian foothills is characterized by constant high atmospheric humidity (over 80%). In the cold season, while the air temperature is moderately low, the population of this region feels extreme cold. What type of heat transfer increases in such conditions?
a. Conduction
b. -
c. Radiation
*d. Convection
e. Evaporation

8. After falling and hitting the back of the head, a child lost hearing in the right ear and developed peripheral paralysis of the right facial nerve, discharge of a clear fluid from the right auditory canal, and diffuse neurological symptoms. Make the provisional diagnosis.
a. Cerebral contusion, subarachnoid hemorrhage
b. Concussion
c. Meningoencephalitis
*d. Cerebral contusion, basilar skull fracture
e. Post-traumatic meningoencephalitis

9. A 43-year-old woman complains of persistent abdominal pain with recurrent pain attacks, nausea, repeated vomiting with stagnant bowel content, abdominal distension, and flatulence. She has been presenting with these signs for 7 hours. Pulse is 116/min. The tongue is dry and brown. The abdomen is symmetrically distended, soft, painful. Percussion reveals tympanitis. On auscultation there are bowel sounds with a metallic overtone, sounds of splashing and dripping. Make the diagnosis:
*a. Acute intestinal obstruction
b. Acute destructive cholecystitis
c. Acute nonspecific colitis
d. Acute necrotizing pancreatitis
e. Acute erosive gastritis

10. A 67-year-old patient has suddenly developed slurred (unintelligible) speech, voice change (nasal voice), dysphagia, and the blood pressure of 120/80 mm Hg. The symptoms lasted for 2 hours, after which they regressed on their own. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Intracerebral hemorrhage
*b. Transient ischemic attack
c. Hypertensive encephalopathy
d. Cerebral infarction
e. Subdural hemorrhage

11. A 48-year-old man complains of constant pain in the upper abdomen, predominantly on the left, which aggravates after eating, diarrhea, loss of weight. The patient has alcohol use disorder. Two years ago he had a case of acute pancreatitis. Blood amylase is 4 g/hour·l. Feces analysis: steatorrhea, creatorrhea. Blood sugar is 6,0 mmol/l. What treatment should be prescribed?
a. Gastrozepin (Pirenzepine)
b. Insulin
c. Contrykal (Aprotinin)
d. No-Spa (Drotaverine)
*e. Panzinorm forte (Pancreatin)

12. Before her discharge from a hospital, a full-term newborn girl on the 3rd day of her life developed a recurrent vomiting with blood and stool resembling a ''raspberry jelly''. It is known that her mother refused to let her child receive any intramuscular injections. What laboratory test will be the most informative for confirmation of the diagnosis?
*a. Prothrombin time
b. Partial thromboplastin time
c. Platelet count
d. Bleeding time
e. Thrombin time

13. A 62-year-old woman has an acute onset of the disease: high temperature of 39.8^oC, chills, intense headache, and aching body. She complains of nausea and one episode of vomiting. 18 hours later, her right inguinal lymph nodes became enlarged and sharply painful. After another 6 hours, she developed edema of the right shin and skin hyperemia with irregular-shaped clear margins. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Anthrax, edematous form
b. Bubonic tularemia
c. Bubonic plague
*d. Erysipelas, erythematous form
e. Phlegmon of the right shin

14. A man in a state of clinical death receives closed-chest cardiac massage and mouth-to-mouth artificial pulmonary ventilation. The doctor noticed that the air does not enter the patient's airways, and his head and torso are at the same level. Why is artificial pulmonary ventilation ineffective in this case?
a. Closed-chest cardiac massage
b. The patient's mouth is too small
c. The volume of inhaled air is too low
*d. Swallowed tongue
e. No gastric tube

15. Preventive examination of a 75-year-old woman with a moderately active lifestyle shows total serum cholesterol of 5.1 mmol/L (208 mg/dL) and high-density lipoprotein levels of 70 mg/dL. Her ECG is normal. What advise about her diet should be given to this woman?
a. Reduce the intake of saturated fats
b. Reduce the intake of simple  carbohydrates
c. Reduce the cholesterol intake
*d. No changes in the diet
e. Increase the fiber intake

16. Within several days, a person developed a reduction in the peripheral vision, resembling a flap, on the outer side. The patient does not know the cause of this condition. The eye is calm, the optical media are transparent. On the nasal side of eye, ophthalmoscopy detects a gray "sail" with vessels that wavers during eye movements. The optic disc and blood vessels are without changes. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Vascular pathology of the retina
b. Initial signs of glaucoma
c. Lens subluxation
*d. Retinal detachment
e. Hemianopsia with a neurological pathology

17. Examination of a milk sample detected the following: color  -  whitish, odor  -  normal, taste  -  characteristic of milk, density  -  1.038, acidity  -  35^oTh (Thorner degrees), fat content  -  3.2%. Determine the milk quality.
a. The milk is falsified
b. The milk can be used only under certain conditions
*c. The milk is of poor quality
d. The milk is of good quality
e. The milk is of reduced quality

18. A 23-year-old man complains of severe pain in his left knee joint. Objectively the left knee joint is enlarged, with hyperemic skin, painful on palpation. Complete blood count: erythrocytes - 3.8·10^12/L, Hb- 122 g/L, leukocytes - 7.4·10^9/L, platelets - 183·10^9/L. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate - 10 mm/hour. Bleeding time (Duke method) - 4 min., Lee-White coagulation time - 24 min. Partial thromboplastin time (activated) - 89 seconds. Rheumatoid factor - negative. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Hemophilia, hemarthrosis
b. Werlhof disease (immune thrombocytopenia)
c. Thrombocytopathy
d. Hemorrhagic vasculitis (Henoch-Schonlein purpura), articular form
e. Rheumatoid arthritis

19. A premature newborn boy (pregnancy 5, birth 1, gestation term - 27 weeks) has irregular respiration of <30/min. after birth and SpO_2 of 70 %. Retractions of the pliable areas of the chest and expiratory groaning are observed. Without oxygen support, generalized cyanosis occurs. Auscultation reveals crepitus in the basal segments. There are no data on the prevention of respiratory distress syndrome in the baby. What treatment tactics must be chosen in this case?
*a. Administer the surfactant preparation intratracheally within the first 15 minutes after birth
b. Prescribe an antibacterial therapy
c. Provide artificial pulmonary ventilation with an Ambu bag and a mask
d. Administer the surfactant preparation intratracheally 2 hours after birth
e. Provide oxygen therapy using an oxygen tent

20. A 34-year-old man undergoes treatment in a psychiatry unit for exacerbation of his schizophrenia. Objectively, he stays in bed, his movements are inhibited, no contact. The patient does not respond to the questions. The position remains unchanged, the patient is hypomimic, such signs as puckering of the lips, waxy flexibility, ''psychological pillow'' are present. The patient has been remaining in this condition for a week. He is being fed parenterally. What psychomotor disorder is it?
a. Anergic stupor
b. Exogenous stupor
c. Depressive stupor
*d. Catatonic stupor
e. Psychogenic stupor

21. A 15-year-old boy complains of periodical headaches and fatigability. On examination, the boy is active, his psychoemotional development corresponds with his age, his skin is pale and clammy. No abnormalities of the internal organs were detected. Blood pressure is 120/80 mm Hg. Noticeable is the excessive subcutaneous fat that is evenly distributed throughout the body. The doctor suspects obesity in the child. What parameter should be measured first to confirm this diagnosis?
a. Obesity of family members
b. Thickness of subcutaneous fat
c. Body mass
*d. Body mass index
e. Body mass to height ratio

22. A 40-year-old woman has been suffering from epilepsy since she was 15. Generalized epileptic seizures occur 2-3 times a month at night and are accompanied by involuntary urination and defecation. After a psychotrauma (her father's death), the attacks became more frequent and now occur every 2-3 minutes. The woman does not return to consciousness between the attacks, her pupils are unresponsive to light. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Epileptic psychosis
b. An increase in the number of grand mal seizures
c. Hysterical attack
d. Absence seizure
*e. Status epilepticus

23. A 16-year-old teenager complains of weakness, dizziness, and heaviness in the left subcostal region. Objectively, the skin and visible mucosa are icteric. The tower skull syndrome is observed. The liver is +2 cm. The lower edge of the spleen is at the level of the navel. In the blood: erythrocytes - 2.7·10^12/L, Hb - 88 g/L, leukocytes - 5.6·10^9/L, ESR - 15 mm/hour. What is the most likely change in the bilirubin levels in this patient?
a. Decrease in conjugated bilirubin levels
b. Decrease in unconjugated bilirubin levels
*c. Increase in unconjugated bilirubin levels
d. Increase in conjugated bilirubin levels
e. Increase in unconjugated and conjugated bilirubin levels

24. A 45-year-old man with thrombophlebitis of the deep veins in his legs suddenly after physical exertion developed sharp pain in his thorax on the right, dyspnea, and hemoptysis. Objectively his condition is severe; he presents with acrocyanosis, shortening of pulmonary percussion sound on the right, and weakened respiration. Respiration is 30/min., blood pressure is 110/80 mm Hg. ECG shows sinus tachycardia, heart rate is 120/min., electrical axis of the heart deviates to the right, S_I-Q_III. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Pulmonary embolism
b. Spontaneous pneumothorax
c. Cancer of the right lung
d. Community-acquired right-sided pneumonia
e. Right-sided exudative pleurisy

25. A 35-year-old woman complains of high body temperature and pain in the upper outer quadrant of her right buttock, which developed after an injection. She has been presenting with this condition for 3 days. At the site of injection the skin is hyperemic; there is a painful infiltrate with an area of softening in its center. The woman is diagnosed with a postinjection abscess of the right buttock. What tactics should the surgeon choose in this case?
a. Antipyretic agents, massage, and application of dry heat to the right buttock
b. Hospitalization, prescription of antibiotics, UHF
c. Abscess puncture, pus removal followed by application of antiseptics
d. 10-15 minutes of low-intensity laser radiation directed at the right buttock
*e. Abscess incision, sanation and drainage of the cavity

26. A 42-year-old patient complains of dense edema of both hands, tightness of the skin of the face, intermittent pain in the joints, discoloration of the skin of the fingers when exposed to cold. Objectively, the following is observed: amimia of the face, telangiectasia, the skin of the hands is pale and cold. Capillaroscopy reveals reduced capillary density, giant capillaries, and hemorrhages. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
*a. Systemic scleroderma
b. Reactive arthritis
c. Systemic lupus erythematosus
d. Rheumatoid arthritis
e. Dermatomyositis

27. A 45-year-old man came to the hematologist with complaints of general weakness, elevated body temperature, excessive sweating, enlarged cervical lymph nodes. Objectively, his body temperature is 37.5^oC, the skin is pale and dry, the posterior cervical lymph nodes are dense and elastic, up to 2 cm in diameter, mobile. Hepatosplenomegaly was detected. What examination is necessary to determine the scope of the pathologic process?
a. Ultrasound of the cervical lymph nodes
b. Bone scintigraphy
c. Abdominal X-ray
*d. Computed tomography
e. Complete blood count

28. A 49-year-old man complains of angina pectoris attacks that occur when he walks up to 500 m. He has a many-year-long history of chronic bronchitis. Examination detects a small number of dry diffuse crackles in the lungs, the respiratory rate is 18/min. The borders of the heart are expanded to the left, the heart sounds are muffled, the heart rate=PS=86/min., the blood pressure is 160/100 mm Hg. Complete blood count shows the following: Hb - 160 g/L, leukocytes - 6.4·10^9/L, ESR - 7 mm/hour. ECG shows hypertrophy of the left ventricle. What group of drugs is contraindicated in this case, taking into account the concomitant pathology?
a. Antiplatelet drugs
*b. Beta blockers
c. Calcium antagonists
d. Long-acting nitrates
e. Angioprotectors

29. A 13-year-old girl came to a school doctor. Two days ago she first developed moderate bloody discharge from her genital tracts. Her secondary sexual characteristics are developed. What is the most likely cause of the bloody discharge in this case?
a. Juvenile bleeding
b. Hemophilia
*c. Menarche
d. Endometrial cancer
e. Werlhof's disease

30. A woman complains of a persistent increase in her blood pressure to 160-180/95-100 mm Hg and weight gain of 8 kg. Examination detects a purple-cyanotic tint of the skin of her face and back and emphstriae rubrae on the skin of her abdomen. Laboratory blood test: glucose - 8.3 mmol/L, leukocytes - 9.1·10^9/L. Make the provisional diagnosis.
a. Secondary arterial hypertension
*b. Cushing disease
c. Conn syndrome
d. Pheochromocytoma
e. Essential hypertension

31. A 3-year-old child has episodes accompanied by cyanosis, sudden anxiety, and squatting. Objectively, the child has "drumstick" deformation of the finger phalanges and nails that resemble a clockface. The cardiac dullness boundaries are shifted to the left and right. A systolic tremor can be detected in the second intercostal space near the left edge of the sternum. A coarse systolic murmur can be heard with р.max in the second intercostal space. The second heart sound is weakened over the base of the heart. X-ray shows that the heart is in the form of a "wooden shoe", the pulmonary pattern is poorly visible. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Atrial septal defect
b. Primary bacterial endocarditis
*c. Tetralogy of Fallot
d. Ventricular septal defect
e. Dilated cardiomyopathy

32. Screening detected phenylketonuria in a two-week-old baby. What treatment must be prescribed for this child to prevent severe complications in the future?
a. Sunbathing
b. Antibiotic therapy
*c. Special diet
d. Vitamin therapy
e. Hormone therapy

33. A 45-year-old woman was hospitalized with complaints of periodical severe headaches against the background of elevated blood pressure up to 180/90 mm Hg, muscle weakness, and frequent urination (at night as well). Her anamnesis states that despite combining various antihypertensive drugs and adjusting their dosage her arterial hypertension cannot be corrected with drugs. The patient's blood serum potassium levels are 2.0 mmol/L, blood serum sodium levels are 160.0 mmol/L. Ultrasound imaging detects three-dimensional formations approximately 1.0 cm in diameter in the both adrenal glands. Selective endovascular blood sampling from the suprarenal veins was performed, which revealed significant increase of cortisol and aldosterone levels. Make the diagnosis:
a. Cushing's disease
b. Cushing's syndrome
c. Pheochromocytoma
*d. Aldosteroma
e. Androsteroma

34. A 50-year-old woman complains of acute pain in the epigastric region, vomiting, and sudden general weakness. The disease onset was 2 days ago. Objectively, she has pale skin and dry tongue. Pulse  -  100/min., of poor volume, blood pressure  -  110/70 mm Hg. During palpation, the abdomen is soft, moderately painful in the epigastrium and mesogastrium, there are no signs of peritoneal irritation. Peristalsis is significantly increased in the mesogastrium on the left. X-ray detected Kloiber bowls (air-fluid levels) on the left. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Acute cholecystitis
b. Acute pancreatitis
*c. Intestinal obstruction
d. Perforated duodenal ulcer
e. Food poisoning

35. A 37-year-old man complains of a pain in his lumbar and thoracic spine and limited spinal mobility for the last 5 years. After examination he was diagnosed with central ankylosing spondylitis. This man is likley to be a carrier of the following HLA antigen:
a. HLA-DR8
b. HLA-DR4
c. HLA-B5
d. HLA-DR20
*e. HLA-B27

36. A 14-year-old girl has chronic glomerulonephritis and chronic kidney failure. The girl's anemic syndrome continues to progress. What drug should be prescribed for the pathogenetic therapy of this type of anemia?
a. Folic acid
b. Cyanocobalamin
*c. Erythropoietin
d. Iron supplements
e. Packed erythrocytes

37. A 76-year-old patient complains of difficulty urinating at night, with urination occurring up to 3 times, and a feeling of incomplete emptying of the bladder. This condition has been observed for 2 years already. Objectively, after the act of urination, percussion detects dullness over the pubis. The sign of costovertebral angle tenderness (Pasternatski's sign) is negative. The external genitalia are normal. Rectal examination detects that the prostate is enlarged to 2-3 times of its normal size, smooth, elastic, symmetrical, with clear contours. The intestinal mucosa is mobile over the prostate. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Prostate abscess
b. Prostate tuberculosis
c. Prostate cancer
d. Chronic prostatitis
*e. Prostate adenoma

38. During preventive ultrasound scan of abdomen performed during regular check-up in a school the following was revealed in an 11-year-old student of the 5th grade: the left kidney is 3 cm below the normal position, its shape, size and structure are within the norm, the contralateral kidney cannot be observed at its proper place. The preliminary diagnosis is as follows: congenital anomaly of renal development, dystopic left kidney, right kidney is absent or pelvic dystopic. What X-ray method would be required for making the final diagnosis and determining the functional capacity of both kidneys?
a. Radioimmunoassay
*b. Renal dynamic scintigraphy
c. Thermography
d. Radionuclide renography
e. Excretory urography

39. For 2 weeks a 37-year-old HIV-positive man has been presenting with progressing dyspnea and body temperature up to 37.7^oC) He was diagnosed with pneumocystic pneumonia. What etiotropic drug is indicated in this case?
a. Fluconazole
b. Ceftriaxone
c. Acyclovir
*d. Co-trimoxazole
e. Metronidazole

40. During medical examination of students, the doctor noticed that an 18-year-old student had the height of 176 cm, the body weight of 68 kg, dry skin, and hyperkeratosis. Specialized examination revealed a significant decrease in the acuity of the student's twilight vision. What nutrient is deficient in this case, causing this health condition in the student?
a. Vitamin C
b. Selenium
c. Vitamin B_1
*d. Vitamin A
e. Phosphorus

41. A 7-year-old boy has been receiving treatment for a month. At the time of hospitalization, he had marked edemas, and daily urine protein of 4.2 g. Biochemical blood test shows persistent hypoproteinemia (43.2 g/L) and hypercholesterolemia (9.2 mmol/L ). What leading glomerulonephritis syndrome is most likely in this patient?
a. Isolated urinary
b. Mixed
*c. Nephrotic
d. Nephritic
e. Hematuric

42. A parturient woman is 30 years old, stage I of the labor is ongoing. The fetus is in the cephalic presentation. Auscultation of the fetal heart sounds detects bradycardia. Evaluation of cardiotocogram yielded the following data: decrease of basal heart rate down to 90/min., variability - monotonous (2 and less); late decelerations with amplitude of 50/min. Make the diagnosis and choose the obstetrical tactics necessary in this case:
a. Fetal distress. Vacuum extraction delivery
*b. Fetal distress. Urgent cesarean section delivery
c. Fetal distress. Stimulation of uterine contractions
d. Fetal distress. Forceps delivery
e. Normal condition of the fetus. Vaginal birth

43. A 27-year-old woman has been hospitalized into the psychiatric inpatient department. In the past, she underwent two courses of treatment at a psychiatric hospital because of her hallucinatory-paranoid symptoms. During the examination, she is tense and reluctant to communicate. However, she reports that she "hears a voice in her head", which she interprets as "the voice of her double from a parallel world". She believes that her children and husband were "replaced with their doubles" and is hostile towards them. Her thinking is paralogical and inconsistent. She is emotionally monotonous, her volitional impulses are reduced. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Oneiroid syndrome
b. Major depressive disorder
*c. Schizophrenia, paranoid subtype
d. Reactive paranoid psychosis
e. Bipolar disorder, mixed episode

44. A 14-year-old boy complains of fatigability, face edema, headache, and urination in small portions. The urine resembles meat slops in color. The boy is registered for regular check-ups since the age of 8 because of chronic glomerulonephritis. His blood creatinine is 0.350 mmol/L, blood urea - 10.4 mmol/L. What complication is the most likely cause of this clinical presentation?
a. Acute renal failure
b. Renal tuberculosis
c. Chronic circulatory failure
*d. Chronic renal failure
e. Chronic glomerulonephritis

45. At night a 2-year-old child with upper respiratory tract infection suddenly developed dyspnea with labored inspiration. Objectively the skin is pale, perioral cyanosis and slight acrocyanosis are observed. Breathing is loud, respiration rate is 32/min. Jugular, supra- and infraclavicular fossae retract during breathing. Respiration is coarse on auscultation. Heart sounds are clear and sonorous, heart rate is 120/min. What condition was complicated by the development of the upper respiratory tract infection?
a. Airway foreign body
*b. Stenosing laryngotracheitis
c. Bronchiolitis
d. Obstructive bronchitis
e. Bronchial asthma

46. A 30-year-old woman came to a doctor with complaints of menstruations that have been missing for two years after her second childbirth.The childbirth was complicated by a massive bleeding. After giving birth, the woman started noticing hair loss and weight loss. Objectively, the woman's body type is asthenic, her external genitalia are hypoplastic, the cervix is cylindrical, the body of the uterus is small and painless, the uterine appendages cannot be detected. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Pituitary tumor (Cushing disease)
*b. Pituitary amenorrhea (Sheehan syndrome)
c. Uterine pregnancy
d. Stein-Leventhal syndrome
e. Primary amenorrhea

47. A 30-year-old woman complains of abdominal discomfort on the left, pain in the joints, fever, and periodic hemorrhages. Objectively, hepatolienal syndrome is observed. Complete blood count revealed the following: leukocytes  -  200·10^9/L, numerous granulocytes at various degrees of maturity, myeloblasts  -  < 5% in the bone marrow, the Rh-chromosome is positive. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
*a. Chronic myeloid leukemia
b. Malignant tumor
c. Leukemoid reaction
d. Myelofibrosis
e. Acute leukemia

48. When planning treatment of a patient, it was decided to use a medicine with evidence level A) What trials produce the evidence that allows to classify the medicine as level A?
a. Expert consensus
b. Data obtained from many non-randomized trials
c. Case-control studies
d. Data obtained from one randomized clinical trial
*e. Data obtained from several randomized clinical trials

49. A 3-year-old child was hospitalized with generalized tonic-clonic seizures that last 50 minutes already and occurred against the background of hyperthermic syndrome caused by influenza. The child was receiving no therapy. What aid must be provided for urgent treatment of the seizure syndrome in this case?
a. Administer calcium gluconate intravenously
b. Administer phenobarbital intramuscularly
*c. Administer lorazepam intravenously
d. Urgently apply cold compresses
e. Prescribe paracetamol in age-appropriate doses

50. A 42-year-old man, a worker at the meat processing factory, developed an itching spot on his lower jaw, which gradually transformed into a slightly painful carbuncle 3 cm in diameter, surrounded by a painless swelling that reaches the clavicle. Temperature is subfebrile, under 37.8^oC) The doctor suspects anthrax. What drug should this man be prescribed for treatment?
a. Azidothymidin (Zidovudine)
b. Levomycetin (Chloramphenicol)
c. Biseptol (Co-trimoxazole)
d. Interferon alpha
*e. Penicillin

51. A 36-year-old man has been suffering from rheumatoid arthritis for 8 years. Two months ago he developed swelling of the left knee joint that was resistant to treatment. Objectively, he has synovitis of the left knee joint. A puncture of the joint was performed, obtaining 50 mL of exudate. What cells will be detected during the examination of the puncture material obtained from the joint?
a. Eosinophils
*b. Ragocytes
c. LE cells
d. Erythrocytes
e. Reed–Sternberg cells

52. A patient had recurrent attacks of a short-term "disconnect" of consciousness, did not respond when talked to, and was looking straight ahead. What examination method should be prescribed for the patient?
a. Doppler ultrasound
b. Rheoencephalography
c. Lumbar puncture
*d. Electroencephalography
e. Echoencephaloscopy

53. A 34-year-old man complains of pale edema of the face, feet, shins, and lumbar area, elevated blood pressure up to 160/100 mm Hg, and general weakness. He has a clinical history of nonspecific ulcerative colitis. Objectively: pulse - 84/min., rhythmic, blood pressure - 165/100 mm Hg; edemas all over the body; the skin is pale and dry, with low turgor. The kidneys cannot be palpated, on an attempt to palpate them they are painless. Blood test: erythrocytes - 3.0·10^12/L, Нb- 100 g/L, erythrocyte sedimentation rate - 50 mm/hour. Urinalysis: proteins - 3.5 g/L, erythrocytes - 7-10 in the vision field, leukocytes - 5-6 in the vision field. Daily proteinuria - 6 grams. What analysis should be conducted additionally to verify the diagnosis?
a. Renal ultrasound
*b. Gingival biopsy for the diagnosis of amyloid disease
c. Urinalysis for Bence-Jones protein
d. Radioisotopic examination of kidneys
e. Survey and excretory urography

54. Examination detected 24-hour proteinuria of 2.2 g in a 30-year-old woman. Biopsy revealed changes in the glomerular capillary walls in the shape of wire loops. What morphological form of kidney damage is indicated by the biopsy results?
a. IgA nephropathy
b. Nephrosclerosis
c. Membranous glomerulonephritis
d. Mesangial glomerulonephritis
*e. Diffuse lupus glomerulonephritis

55. A trial was conducted to study the effectiveness of arterial hypertension treatment using a new drug, compared with traditional therapy. The were 3,000 participants in the trial, divided into two identical groups, taking into account their age, sex, stage of the disease, etc. One group was receiving treatment with the new drug, while the other was receiving traditional therapy and was the control group. The trial participants did not know which therapy they were receiving. What type of trial was conducted in this case?
a. Case-control study
*b. Blind randomized controlled trial
c. Cross-sectional study
d. Double-blind randomized controlled trial
e. Prospective cohort study

56. A 20-year-old man suffers from headache, general weakness, and face edema that appears in the morning. 18 days earlier he had a case of tonsillitis. Objectively, his skin is pale, there are edema under his eyes. Heart rate is 60/min., blood pressure is 185/100 mm Hg. The sign of costovertebral angle tenderness (punch sign in the lumbar region) is negative. Urinalysis: color of ''meat slops'', protein - 4.5 g/L, altered erythrocytes - 40-45 in the vision field, leukocytes - 5-6 in the vision field. 24-hour diuresis is 400 mL. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Urolithiasis
b. Systemic lupus erythematosus
c. Acute pyelonephritis
d. Renal amyloidosis
*e. Acute glomerulonephritis

57. A 65-year-old woman complains of a sudden dyspnea attack, retrosternal pain, hemoptysis, and pain and edema in her left lower leg. Objectively, cyanosis is observed, auscultation detects that the second heart sound is accentuated over the pulmonary artery, pulse - 110/min., blood pressure - 80/40 mm Hg. ECG reveals the McGinn-White sign (S1, Q3, T3), right axis deviation, overload of the right-sided chambers of the heart, and right bundle branch block. D-dimer levels - 10 mcg/mL of blood. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Cardiogenic shock
b. Pulmonary edema
*c. Pulmonary thromboembolism
d. Pulmonary infarction
e. Spontaneous pneumothorax

58. In 10 hours after eating canned mushrooms a 27-year-old patient has developed diplopia, bilateral ptosis, disrupted swallowing, shallow breathing with respiratory rate 40/min., muscle weakness, enteroparesis. What measure should be taken first?
a. Intravenous detoxication therapy
b. Gastrointestinal lavage
c. Introduction of antibotulinic serum
*d. Intubation of the trachea for artificial respiration
e. Introduction of glucocorticosteroids

59. A 26-year-old woman complains of cramping abdominal pain, diarrhea with a significant amount of mucus and blood, and fever of 37.5-38.0^oС. Objectively, her skin and mucosa are pale, the body type is asthenic. Palpation detects pain along the large intestine. Colonofibroscopy reveals edematous wall of the rectum and sigmoid colon, erosions, small ulcers, and mucus with blood in the lumen. What is the likely diagnosis in this case?
*a. Nonspecific ulcerative colitis
b. Crohn's disease
c. Cancer of the large intestine
d. Dysentery
e. Chronic enteritis

60. A 19-year-old girl complains of moderate itching and hair loss on her head. Objectively, on the skin of her occipital region there is a single round erythematous focus 3 cm in diameter with clear margins. Asbestos-like scales can be observed on the surface of the lesion. The hair in the focus of the lesion is broken off at the length of 6-8 mm. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Seborrhea
b. Trichophytosis
*c. Microsporia
d. Scabies
e. Psoriasis

61. A 68-year-old woman with congestive heart failure and left ventricular ejection fraction of textless40% receives the following pharmacotherapy scheme: ramipril, torasemide, bisoprolol, clopidogrel, and digoxin. During one of her regular examinations, frequent polymorphic ventricular extrasystoles were detected in the patient. What medicine should be removed from her therapy scheme?
a. Ramipril
*b. Digoxin
c. Torasemide
d. Clopidogrel
e. Bisoprolol

62. A 23-year-old woman came to the gynecological clinic. She complains of pain, itching, and burning in her vulva, general weakness, indisposition, elevated body temperature up to 37.2^oC, and headache. On examination in the vulva there are multiple vesicles up to 2-3 mm in diameter with clear contents against the background of hyperemia and mucosal edema. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Primary syphilis
b. Papillomavirus infection
c. Vulvar cancer
*d. Genital herpes infection
e. Cytomegalovirus infection

63. An 18-year-old young woman complains of pain in her lower abdomen, an increase in her body temperature to 37.5^oС, and purulent discharge from the genital tracts. Gynecological examination detects the following: the urethra is infiltrated, the cervix is hyperemic and edematous, the discharge is profuse and purulent, the uterus is of normal size and painful to palpation, the appendages on both sides are corded and painful. Bacterioscopy of secretions detected Gram-negative diplococci intracellularly. What disease is observed in the patient?
a. Trichomonas colpitis
b. Chronic gonorrhea
c. Bacterial vaginosis
*d. Acute ascending gonorrhea
e. Subacute ascending gonorrhea

64. An agitated patient keeps trying to look behind the door and into the next room, because he is convinced that his friends are there. He claims that he hears a conversation between his friends and strangers, despite there being no one nearby. He tries to convince the doctor that arguing about "his punishment" is occurring behind the wall. He loudly repeats the phrases that he claims he has heard from behind the wall. What pathological condition is observed in the patient?
*a. Acute hallucinosis
b. Verbal illusions
c. Intrusive thoughts
d. Confabulations
e. Delirium

65. A region attended by a central regional hospital demonstrates increased hemorrhagic stroke morbidity. Essential hypertension morbidity, however, remains at the same level and is below the average level registered within the larger area. What managerial decision should be made in this case?
a. To design and implement measures for professional development of medical workers
b. To design and implement measures for primary prevention of essential hypertension
c. To design and implement improved dispensary system for hypertensive patients
d. To design and implement measures for secondary prevention of hypertension complications
*e. To design and implement measures for early diagnostics of arterial hypertension

66. A 30-year-old woman complains of pain in her lower abdomen, a fever of 38.8°С, and profuse gray-yellow foul-smelling liquid discharge from the genital tract. According to the patient's history, the complaints arose after a sexual intercourse. Examination reveals that the appendages on both sides are enlarged and painful during palpation. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Endometriosis
b. Vaginal candidiasis
c. Acute trichomoniasis
*d. Gonococcal infection
e. Syphilis

67. A 28-year-old man is undergoing a treatment for pulmonary tuberculosis. He complains of shortness of breath and a sharp chest pain on the right that appeared suddenly. Percussion detects a bandbox resonance over the right lung, auscultation detects no breathing there. X-ray shows that the right lung is collapsed to its root by 1/2 of its volume, the heart and mediastinal organs are shifted to the left. What complication has developed in this patient?
a. Pulmonary infarction
*b. Spontaneous pneumothorax
c. Exudative pleurisy
d. Pleural empyema
e. Dry pleurisy

68. A 30-year-old woman lives with a husband diagnosed with typhus. Both of them have an infestation of body lice. What drug must be used for emergency prevention of epidemic typhus in the woman?
a. Live typhus vaccine
b. Inactivated typhus vaccine
c. Hyperimmune equine serum
d. Human immunoglobulin
*e. Doxycycline

69. A person was hospitalized with a closed craniocerebral trauma 8 hours after a car accident. The patient is unconscious. Objectively, there are anisocoria, a wound in the parietal area 3.0x1.0 cm in size, and neck muscles rigidity. The pulse is 58/min., hard. Convulsive syndrome is observed. What is the most important indication for immediate surgery in this case?
a. Intensifying seizures
*b. Intracranial hemorrhage
c. Unconsciousness
d. Anisocoria
e. Wounds

70. A 42-year-old woman has been hospitalized with complaints of intense pain attacks in the lumbar and right iliac areas, which irradiate to the vulvar lips, frequent urination, nausea. The pain onset was acute. Objectively: the abdomen is soft, moderately painful in the right subcostal area, costovertebral angle tenderness on the right. Common urine analysis: specific gravity - 1016, traces of protein, leukocytes - 6-8 in the vision field, erythrocytes - 12-16 in the vision field, fresh. What diagnosis can be made?
a. Acute cholecystitis
b. Acute right-sided adnexitis
*c. Right-sided renal colic
d. Acute appendicitis
e. Acute right-sided pyelonephritis

71. For the past 6 years a 37-year-old woman has been experiencing frequent nosebleeds, severe metrorrhagias, and periodic bruising on her skin. 10 days ago, after a severe nosebleed, her weakness intensified, she developed dizziness and palpitations. Objectively, her skin is pale, there are multiple petechiae and isolated ecchymoses on the anterior surface of her torso, legs, and arms. In the blood: Hb - 80 g/L, erythrocytes - 4.0·10^12/L, color index - 0.7; leukocytes - 5.3·10^9/L; band neutrophils - 2%, segmented neutrophils - 65%, eosinophils - 2%, lymphocytes - 24%, monocytes - 5%, platelets - 10·10^9/L, ESR - 15 mm/hour. Make the diagnosis:
a. Hemorrhagic vasculitis
b. Aplastic anemia
c. Hemophilia
*d. Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura
e. Iron deficiency anemia

72. A 55-year-old woman came to a doctor with complaints of a heavy sensation in her left shin and periodical cramps of the gastrocnemius muscles that occur at night. She has been suffering from this condition for 5 years, since the moment when these signs first appeared. Her condition has been remaining untreated all this time. Objectively, on the medial surface of the left shin and thigh there are dense subcutaneous varicose veins that are painless on palpation. Make the diagnosis:
a. Arteriosclerosis obliterans of the vessels in the left leg
b. Acute thrombosis of the deep veins in the left leg
c. Acute ascending thrombophlebitis of the subcutaneous veins in the left leg
*d. Subcutaneous varicose veins in the left leg
e. Post-thrombotic syndrome in the left leg

73. For the last 2 years, a 32-year-old woman has been observing periodical pain attacks in her right subcostal area that could be removed with no-spa (drotaverine). The pain is not always associated with meals, sometimes it is caused by anxiety and accompanied by cardiac pain and palpitations. Objectively, the woman is emotionally labile. Abdominal palpation detects a slight pain in the area of the gallbladder. What pathology is the most likely to cause such clinical presentation?
a. Chronic pancreatitis
b. Duodenitis
c. Chronic cholangitis
*d. Biliary dyskinesia
e. Chronic cholecystitis

74. A 2-year-old girl has a medical history of recurrent obstructive pneumonia. In the lungs various moist and dry crackles can be auscultated, breath sounds are diminished. Sputum is thick, viscous and difficult to expectorate. Drumstick fingers and physical developmental retardation are observed. What preliminary diagnosis can be made?
a. Bronchial asthma
*b. Pulmonary mucoviscidosis
c. Congenital polycystic lungs
d. Recurrent bronchitis
e. Pulmonary tuberculosis

75. A 12-year-old girl for two weeks presents with periodical body temperature elevations to 39^oС, spindle-shaped swelling of the interphalangeal joints, pain in the upper chest and neck, and morning stiffness. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Osteoarthritis
b. Toxic synovitis
c. Rheumatism
d. Septic arthritis
*e. Juvenile rheumatoid arthritis

76. In the inpatient gynecological unit within a year 6500 women underwent treatment. They spent there a total of 102000 bed-days. What indicator of the gynecological unit work can be calculated based on these data?
a. Number of beds by hospital department
*b. Average length of inpatient stay
c. Bed turnover rate
d. Average bed occupancy rate per year
e. Planned bed occupancy rate per year

77. A multigravida on the 38th week of her pregnancy complains of increased BP up to 140/90 mm Hg, edema of the shins for 2 weeks. In the last month she gained 3.5 kg of weight. Urine analysis: protein - 0.33 g/L. What is the most likely diagnosis:
a. Pregnancy edema
*b. Mild preeclampsia
c. Severe preeclampsia
d. Pregnancy hypertension
e. Moderate preeclampsia

78. An 8-year-old girl complains of frequent painful urination in small amounts and urinary incontinence. The signs have been present for 2 days already. She explains her disease by overexposure to cold. Costovertebral angle tenderness is absent. Complete blood count is without pathologies. Urine test: leukocytes - 20-30 in the vision field, erythrocytes - 40-50 in the vision field, unchanged, bacteriuria. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Vulvitis
b. Glomerulonephritis
*c. Cystitis
d. Urolithiasis
e. Pyelonephritis

79. A 10-year-old boy was treated in the cardiology department for rheumatism, first attack, active phase, second degree activity. Discharged in a satisfactory condition. What drug should be prescribed in this case for prevention of secondary rheumatism?
a. Ampicillin
*b. Bicillin-5
c. Oxacillin
d. Bicillin-1
e. Erythromycin

80. A patient has gradually lost his consciousness. The skin is pale and dry. There is smell of ammonia from the mouth. Respirations are deep and noisy. Heart sounds are muffled, pericardial friction rub is present. Blood pressure is 180/130 mm Hg. Blood test: Нb - 80 g/L, leukocytes - 12·10^9/L, blood glucose - 6.4 mmol/L, urea - 50 mmol/L, creatinine - 1200 mcmol/L, blood osmolarity - 350 mOsmol/kg H_2O. No urinary excretion. Make the diagnosis:
a. Hyperosmolar coma
b. Hyperglycemic coma
*c. Uremic coma
d. Acute renal failure
e. Acute disturbance of cerebral circulation

81. A 45-year-old woman undergoes an inpatient treatment. She complains of elevated body temperature up to 39.0^oC, pain in her right lumbar area, turbid urine with blood. CT scan shows an area of low density within the parenchyma, no difference between the cortical and medullary layers, and increased density of the perinephric fat due to edema. What is the diagnosis?
a. Renal abscess
b. Paranephritis
c. Renal carcinoma
d. Glomerulonephritis
*e. Pyelonephritis

82. A 38-year-old man complains of cough with purulent sputum (up to 60-80 mL per day) and a fever of 39^oС. He associates his condition with overexposure to cold. Objectively, his pulse is 96/min., rhythmic. Blood pressure  -  110/60 mm Hg. Examination revealed that the right side was lagging behind in the process of breathing. Respiratory rate  -  30/min. Percussion detects local dullness of the sound near the angle of the scapula. Auscultation detects heterogeneous wet crackles and amphoric breathing. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Focal pneumonia
b. Bronchial asthma
*c. Acute lung abscess
d. Acute bronchitis
e. Pleural empyema

83. A 3-week-old infant developed large, flaccid vesicles with purulent contents on the skin of chest and abdomen. The vesicles rupture quickly. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Vesiculopustulosis
b. Pemphigus syphiliticus
c. Toxic erythema
d. Pseudofurunculosis
*e. Pemphigus neonatorum

84. A 62-year-old woman undergoes treatment for bilateral gonarthrosis and has been regularly taking diclofenac sodium for 2 years. During the last six months she notes elevations of her blood pressure to 160/100 mm Hg. X-ray of the knee joints shows decreased height of the inter-articular space, marginal growths on the articular surfaces, and epiphyseal osteoporosis. General urinalysis shows the following: specific gravity  -  1010, erythrocytes  -  5-6 in sight, leukocytes  -  10-12 in sight, casts (cylinders)  -  0-1 in sight, glucose  -  not detected, protein  -  0.22 g/L. Fasting plasma glucose  -  6.3 mmol/L. What is the most likely cause of the changes observed in the general urinalysis?
a. Hypertensive nephropathy
*b. Tubulointerstitial nephritis
c. Diabetic nephropathy
d. Urolithiasis
e. Chronic glomerulonephritis

85. A 16-year-old adolescent has been hospitalized with complaints of unceasing nasal hemorrhage and unbearable pain in his right elbow joint. Objectively: the large joint is enlarged and defigurated, the skin over the joint is hyperemic. Arthropathy signs can be observed in the other joints. Ps- 90/min. Blood test: erythrocytes - 3,9· 10^12/l, Нb- 130 g/l, color index - 1,0, leukocytes - 5,6· 10^9/l, platelets - 220· 10^9/l, ESR- 6 mm/hour. Lee-White coagulation time: start- 24', end- 27'10''. What drug would be most efficient in the treatment of this patient?
a. Calcium chloride
b. Aminocapronic acid
c. Concentrated red cells
d. Vicasol (Menadione)
*e. Cryoprecipitate

86. Preventive examination of the population of one of the Ukrainian cities detected spotted tooth enamel and generalized osteosclerosis with calcification of the intervertebral ligaments in 25 % of the residents. What is the most likely cause of these symptoms?
a. Insufficient fluorine intake with tea
b. Insufficient fluorine levels in soil and water
c. Excessive fluorine levels in vegetable products
*d. Excessive fluorine levels in water
e. Insufficient fluorine levels in animal products

87. A 35-year-old woman complains of a pain in her right axillary region. She has been suffering from this condition for a week. Her body temperature is 38^oC) In the right axillary region there are 2 formations, 2 cm in size each. The skin over the formations is dark red and thin. Palpation produces a yellow-white discharge from the fistular openings. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Hydradenitis
b. Folliculitis
c. Lymphadenitis
d. Furuncle
e. Carbuncle

88. A 12-year-old child has been diagnosed with bilateral pneumonia of mycoplasma etiology with mild disease course. What drug must be prescribed for treatment in this case?
a. Aminoglycosides
b. Antifungal agents
c. First generation cephalosporins
d. Aminopenicillins
*e. Second generation macrolides

89. A 38-year-old woman after physical overexertion suddenly developed palpitations, dyspnea, and a dull pain in the cardiac area. For 10 years she has been registered for regular check-ups due to rheumatism and mitral valve disease with non-disturbed blood circulation. Oblectively her pulse is 96/min., of unequal strength. Blood pressure is 110/70 mm Hg, heart rate is 120/min. ECG registers small unevenly-sized waves in place of P-waves, R-R intervals are of unequal length. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Atrial fibrillation
b. Atrial flutter
c. Respiratory arrhythmia
d. Paroxysmal ventricular tachycardia
e. Paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia

90. A 12-year-old girl became acutely ill with a fever of 38.5^oС and a rash appearing on her skin. Objectively, her condition is of moderate severity, she has hepatosplenomegaly, fine punctate rash and maculopapular rash on the flexor surfaces of her limbs, lateral surfaces of the trunk, and lower abdomen. Demarkated bluish-pink coloring is observed on her hands and feet. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Measles
b. Chickenpox
c. Scarlet fever
d. Infectious mononucleosis
*e. Pseudotuberculosis

91. A 35-year-old man was hospitalized with signs of surgical sepsis that has likely been caused by a large carbuncle in his scapular region. Examination detected secondary purulent foci in the liver and right lung. What stage of surgical sepsis is it?
a. Purulent resorptive fever
b. Toxemia
c. Septicemia
*d. Septicopyemia
e. Terminal stage

92. In a 4-year-old child, the disease onset was acute, with an increase in body temperature and multiple episodes of vomiting. Later, the patient developed tonic-clonic seizures and general hyperesthesia. Objectively, the child is sluggish, nuchal rigidity is observed. Laboratory testing of the cerebrospinal fluid shows the following: the cerebrospinal fluid is turbid, Pandy's reaction - +++, protein - 0.99 g/L, neutrophilic pleocytosis is observed. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Meningism
*b. Purulent meningitis
c. Serous meningitis
d. Brain tumor
e. Encephalitis

93. A 50-year-old man complains of palpitations, irregular heart rate, and retrosternal pain attacks that occur during significant physical exertion. Objectively, his heart sounds are muffled and arrhythmic, heart rate - 100/min., blood pressure - 150/90 mm Hg. ECG shows single ventricular extrasystoles. What medicines should be prescribed in this case?
a. Calcium antagonists
b. Diuretics
c. ACE inhibitors
d. Long-acting nitrates
*e. beta-blockers

94. A 38-year-old patient complains of pain in the area of the metatarsophalangeal joints of toes 1-2 on the right foot. Examination detects bluish-purple skin over the affected joints that is hot to the touch. There are nodular formations covered with thin shiny skin in the area of the auricles. What drug must be prescribed for this patient as a part of the urate-lowering therapy?
a. Methotrexate
b. Colchicine
c. Febuxostat
d. Nimesulide
*e. Allopurinol

95. The overall condition of a 24-year-old man, who was being treated for meningococcemia, took a turn for the worse. Objectively, he has acrocyanosis, anuria, his limbs are cold, his respiration is 30/min., heart rate is 140/min., blood pressure is 40/0 mm Hg. What emergency medical condition did the patient develop?
*a. Septic shock
b. Hemolytic-uremic syndrome
c. Hypovolemic shock
d. Pulmonary artery thrombosis
e. Anaphylactic shock

96. For a week a 42-year-old patient has been suffering from fever attacks which occur every 48 hours. Body temperature raises up to 40^oC and decreases in 3-4 hours with excessive sweating. The patient presents with loss of appetite and general fatigue. The skin is pale and sallow. The liver and spleen are enlarged and dense on palpation. What method of diagnosis verification would be most efficient?
*a. Microscopy of blood smear and thick blood film
b. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
c. Complete blood count
d. Bacteriological analysis
e. Microscopy of hanging blood drop

97. A premature newborn from the first pregnancy was born at 37 weeks of gestation, with the weight of 2400 g and the length of 51 cm. The infant is anxious, has limb tremor, does not suckle, exhibits respiratory disturbances and hepatosplenomegaly. At the end of the first day of life the child developed icteric skin and mucosa. On the second day, skin rashes appeared: both separate vesicles and clusters of vesicles located over the ribcage. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Vesiculopustulosis
b. Neonatal pemphigus
*c. Congenital herpes infection
d. Toxoplasmosis
e. Rubella

98. A three-year-old boy has been suffering from stool retention since birth. Every 3-4 days, the mother gives her child enemas. The boy lags behind his peers in physical development. Objectively, he has pale skin and distended abdomen. What disease can be suspected in this child?
*a. Hirschsprung's disease
b. Helminthiasis
c. Peritonitis
d. Coprostasis
e. Intestinal tumor

99. A 65-year-old patient with a history of arterial hypertension complains of dizziness and palpitations that occurred throughout the last hour. Objectively, the following is observed: blood pressure  -  80/40 mm Hg, heart rate  -  150/min., pulse  -  106/min. ECG revealed missing P wave and varying RR intervals, ventricular contraction rate is 136-148/min. What aid must be provided to the patient first?
a. Prescription of amiodarone intravenously
b. Pacemaker implantation
*c. Urgent electrical cardioversion
d. Prescription of beta-blockers intravenously
e. Prescription of calcium channel blockers intravenously

100. An injured electrician in a state of clinical death is being resuscitated. ECG registers large-focal ventricular fibrillation. When, according to the clinical practice guidelines for sudden circulatory arrest, must be medicines administered, namely, adrenaline solution and amiodarone solution?
*a. After the third defibrillation
b. At the very beginning of the resuscitation measures
c. After the second defibrillation
d. After the first defibrillation
e. After the fourth defibrillation

101. A patient has made an appointment with his family doctor, because he needs to undergo a preventive examination before being hired to work at a chemical plant. What type of preventive examination is needed for this patient?
a. Comprehensive
b. Targeted
c. Periodical
*d. Preliminary (pre-placement)
e. Routine

102. A 35-year-old man complains of a chest pain that persists for several months already and an occasionally observed bitter taste in his mouth. The pain is localized behind the sternum, occurs at rest, and sometimes irradiates into the neck. It does not intensify during physical exertion, but may intensify after drinking alcohol or eating a large meal. At night, this condition becomes worse. Swallowing is not disturbed. The body weight is increased. Examination detected no changes. Make the diagnosis:
*a. Gastroesophageal reflux disease
b. Diaphragmatic hernia
c. Globus hystericus
d. Esophageal tumor
e. Esophageal achalasia

103. On examination a man presents with the following signs: progressing weakness, loss of working ability, rapid physical and mental fatigability, sensations of cold and hunger, and weight loss. What type of alimentary disorder is it?
a. Vitamin deficiency
b. Mineral deficiency
c. Polyunsaturated fatty acid deficiency
d. Dietary fiber deficiency
*e. Protein-energy undernutrition

104. A 32-year-old man has been hospitalized with fever episodes that are accompanied by excessive sweating and occur every 48 hours. Twelve years ago he was in military service in Tajikistan, where he had a case of malaria. Objectively, his sclerae are subicteric, his skin is pale, the liver is dense and enlarged by 2 cm, the spleen is enlarged by 5 cm. What test is necessary to clarify and confirm the diagnosis in this case?
a. Serological blood test
b. Serum bilirubin levels
c. Serum activity of ALT and AST enzymes
*d. Microscopy of the thick drop and blood smear
e. Biochemical blood test

105. During a regular check-up of a 50-year-old woman a tumor was detected in her right mammary gland. The tumor is 5 cm in diameter, dense, without clear margins. The skin over the tumor resembles lemon rind, the nipple is inverted. The lymph node can be palpated in the axillary region. What diagnosis is most likely?
a. Lacteal cyst
b. Breast lipoma
c. Diffuse mastopathy
d. Mastitis
*e. Breast cancer

106. A 62-year-old man complains of constant pain in the epigastrium and weight loss of 12 kg. Physical and instrumental examinations (fibrogastroscopy with biopsy, abdominal ultrasound, and chest X-ray) detected cancer of the body of the stomach without signs of distant metastasis. Histology reveals moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma. What scope of surgical intervention is advised in this case?
a. Proximal subtotal gastric resection
*b. Gastrectomy
c. Distal subtotal gastric resection
d. Ivor Lewis procedure
e. Gastroenteroanastomosis (gastroenteric bypass)

107. A person has been hospitalized with the diagnosis of trichinellosis. What food product is the likely cause of this helminthiasis?
a. Mutton
b. Poultry
c. Rabbit
d. Beef
*e. Pork

108. A 34-year-old woman complains of irritability, tearfulness, unmotivated mood swings, finger tremor, rapid fatigability, irregular menstrual cycle, pigmentation appearing around her eyes, and weight loss (10 kg within the last 4 months). Objectively, the following is observed: heart rate - 110/min., blood pressure - 140/75 mm Hg. The thyroid gland is slightly enlarged on palpation, painless, soft and elastic. Dalrymple, Stellwag, Mobius, and von Graefe signs are positive. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Hyperparathyroidism
b. Dermatomyositis
c. Hypothyroidism
d. Addison's disease
*e. Thyrotoxicosis

109. A 19-year-old patient complains of a dry cough, muscle pain, and a fever of 39^oC) A sore throat and subfebrile body temperature were observed for the last week. Objectively, the respiration is harsh. Complete blood count shows the following: leukocytes - 10.0·10^9/L, leukocyte left shift, ESR - 26 mm/hour. Chest X-ray shows an intensified pulmonary pattern, low-intensity focal shadows in the lower segments of the right lung. What medicines should be prescribed in this case?
a. Macrolides
b. Aminoglycosides
c. Sulfanilamides
*d. Penicillin antibiotics
e. Second or third generation cephalosporins

110. A 47-year-old woman complains of paroxysmal headaches that have been occurring for the past 5 years. The pain is unilateral, intense, and localized in the frontal area. It is accompanied by nausea and abdominal discomfort and begins suddenly. The headaches are preceded by blurred vision. The woman has a history of hypertension episodes, but currently takes no medicines. Between the headaches, her condition is satisfactory. Objectively: she is overeating (body mass index is 29), her blood pressure is 170/95 mm Hg. Her neurological status is normal. Make the diagnosis:
a. Hypertensive encephalopathy
b. Chronic subdural hematoma
c. Epilepsy
d. Benign intracranial hypertension
*e. Migraine

111. After playing with ''mosaics'', a 2-year-old child suddenly developed cough, stridorous respirations, urges to vomit, and cyanosis against the background of relative somatic health. What should the doctor suspect first when examining this child?
*a. Foreign body aspiration
b. Acute obstructive bronchitis
c. Acute laryngotracheitis
d. Pertussis
e. Pneumonia

112. A lumbar puncture was performed for a newborn with a suspected intracranial birth injury. Bloody cerebrospinal fluid was obtained. What type of hemorrhage is observed in this case?
a. Subtentorial hemorrhage
b. Supratentorial hemorrhage
c. Epidural hemorrhage
*d. Subarachnoid hemorrhage
e. Cephalohematoma

113. A 15-year-old boy complains of pain attacks in his abdomen during defecation, diarrhea up to 6 times in 24 hours with pus and dark blood in the feces. Objectively, his physical and sexual development is delayed. The skin is pale and dry. The abdomen is distended and painful in the umbilical region and in the right iliac region. Crohn's disease is suspected. What examination is necessary to confirm the diagnosis?
a. Fecal cytology
b. Rectoromanoscopy
*c. Colonoscopy
d. Fibroesophagogastroduodenoscopy
e. Abdominal ultrasound

114. A 73-year-old woman came to the family physician for one of her regular follow-up examinations. Three months ago she was found to have type 2 diabetes mellitus. She was keeping to her diet and exercise plan and taking phytopreparations. On examination her fasting glucose was within the range of 7.8-8.6 mmol/L, HbА1с - 7.9%. Height - 164 cm, weight - 83 kg. What blood sugar-controlling medicine should she be prescribed first in the course of her pharmacological therapy?
a. Glimepiride
b. Gliclazide
*c. Metformin
d. Glibenclamide
e. Insulin

115. Daily diet of a 10-year-old girl contains the following: vitamin В_1 - 1.2 mg, vitamin В_2 - 0.6 mg, vitamin В_6 - 1.4 mg, vitamin РР - 15 mg, vitamin С - 65 mg. Assessment of the girl's nutrition status reveals that she has cheilosis, glossitis, angular cheilitis, and conjunctivitis. The girl is likely to have:
a. Vitamin В_1 hypovitaminosis
b. Vitamin C hypovitaminosis
c. Vitamin PP hypovitaminosis
*d. Vitamin В_2 hypovitaminosis
e. Vitamin В_6 hypovitaminosis

116. After a surgery for a left thigh phlegmon the disease progression was complicated by sepsis. On the 7th day after the surgery there are marked signs of a generalized inflammatory reaction, in blood there are signs of toxic anemia and progressing hypoproteinemia, bilirubin levels are 40 mcmol/L, AST and ALT exceed the norm by 2.5 times. Oliguria persists (700 mL of urine per day). Name the phase of sepsis progression:
a. Stress phase
b. Mixed phase
*c. Catabolic phase
d. Recovery phase
e. Anabolic phase

117. A 30-year-old patient, who has been suffering from headaches, suddenly developed extreme headache after lifting a heavy load, as if he had been hit over the head. Nausea, vomiting, and slight dizziness are observed. In a day he developed pronounced meningeal syndrome and body temperature up to 37,6^oC) A doctor suspects subarachnoid hemorrhage. What additional examination is necessary to confirm this diagnosis?
a. Skull X-ray
b. Computed tomography of the brain
c. Angiography of the brain vessels
d. Rheoencephalography
*e. Lumbar puncture with investigation of the spinal fluid

118. A 39-year-old man undergoes treatment in the surgical department for acute cholecystitis. He was transferred to the therapy department due to an increase in blood pressure to 180/120 mm Hg, protein excretion with urine, and persistent fever. This persistent subfebrile body temperature was resistant to antibiotic therapy. 10 days after the treatment, the patient had an asphyxia attack with difficult expiration. Later, he developed arthralgias and erythematous skin lesions. Eosinophil levels in the blood are 18%. What disease can be suspected in this patient?
a. Hemorrhagic vasculitis  (Henoch-Schoenlein purpura)
*b. Polyarteritis nodosa
c. Acute glomerulonephritis
d. Systemic lupus erythematosus
e. Nonspecific aortoarteritis

119. A 73-year-old patient has been suffering from chronic atrophic gastritis for over 10 years. Objectively, her skin and mucosa are pale and subicteric, the tongue is bright red, with marked atrophy. The patient is hemodynamically stable. Sensitivity is symmetrically reduced in the patient's legs. Complete blood count: erythrocytes  -  1.5·10^12/L, hemoglobin  -  60 g/L, color index  -  1.2, platelets  -  120·10^9/L, leukocytes  -  3.0·10^9/L, megalocytes, hypersegmentation of neutrophil nuclei. What complication of chronic atrophic gastritis has occurred in the patient?
a. Stomach cancer
b. Peptic ulcer
*c. B_12 deficiency anemia
d. Acute hemorrhage
e. Iron deficiency anemia

120. After being stung by a bee, an 18-year-old patient feels hot and presents with dyspnea and edema of her lip, face, and neck. The patient's breathing is difficult and noisy, the patient has cough. The skin is pale and cold to the touch. Blood pressure  -  75/50 mm Hg. Pulse  -  98/min., thready. Tachycardia is observed, the heart sounds are muffled and rhythmic. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Status asthmaticus
b. Quincke's edema
c. Urticaria
*d. Anaphylactic shock
e. Hypotonic crisis

121. A 25-year-old woman had an abortion half a year ago. She complains of loss of appetite, weakness, and arthralgia. Two weeks later, she developed dark urine and jaundice. Against this background, her general condition continues to deteriorate. Viral hepatitis is suspected. What marker of viral hepatitis is likely to be positive in the patient?
a. Anti-HEV IgM
*b. Anti-HBc IgM
c. Anti-HBs
d. Anti-CMV IgM
e. Anti-HAV IgM

122. An 18-year-old patient complains of skin rash. The patient has been suffering from this condition for 5 years. The first instance of this disease occurred after a car accident. Objectively: the patient presents with a papular rash covered in silvery scales, ''thimble'' sign (small pits on the nails), affected joints. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Panaritium
b. Rheumatism
*c. Psoriasis
d. Lupus erythematosus
e. Onychomycosis

123. A 3-year-old child presents with dyspnea that abates in the sitting position, occasional loss of consciousness and seizures, delayed physical development, cyanosis, drumstick fingers. Echocardioscopy detects aortic dextraposition, ventricular septal defect, pulmonary artery stenosis, and right ventricular hypertrophy. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Ventricular septal defect
b. Acquired valvular disease
*c. Tetrad of Fallot
d. Coarctation of the aorta
e. Transposition of the great vessels

124. A district doctor has diagnosed one of his patients with dysentery. What accounting document reflects this type of morbidity?
a. Certificate of temporary disability
b. Control card of a patient registered for regular check-ups
c. Report on a major non-epidemic disease
*d. Urgent report
e. Statistical report

125. A 13-year-old boy complains of a dry cough and shortness of breath. The onset of the disease was one year ago. He has brief asphyxia attacks that occur 1-2 times per month. Objectively, the child is anxious and has expiratory dyspnea, his skin is pale, his nasolabial triangle is cyanotic. His respiratory rate is 48/min. Percussion produces a banbox resonance over the lungs; auscultation detects weakened breathing with bilateral dry wheezing. Forced expiratory volume is 80% of the normal. What medicine should be prescribed to this boy?
a. Prednisolone
b. Euphyllin (Aminophylline)
c. Indomethacin
*d. Salbutamol
e. Suprastin (Chloropyramine)

126. An 18-year-old girl complains of pain in her knee and ankle joints and a fever of 38.5°С. She has a history of acute tonsillitis that occurred 2 weeks ago. Objectively, the following is observed: edema of the joints, pain and limited mobility, annular erythema on the torso and proximal parts of the limbs. Auscultation detects the heart rate of 95/min., weakened heart sounds, and a soft systolic murmur over the apex. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Rheumatoid arthritis
b. Reactive arthritis
c. Systemic scleroderma
*d. Acute rheumatic fever
e. Systemic lupus erythematosus

127. After the extraction of the second molar, the patient's body temperature increased. He developed pharyngeal pain on the left, infiltration, hyperemia of the lower part of the anterior palatine arch, and displacement of a tonsil towards the midline and upwards. Regional lymph nodes are painful to palpation. The otolaryngologist diagnosed the patient with paratonsillar abscess. What is the route of infection spread in this case?
a. Entry of a foreign body
b. Tonsilogenic
c. Lymphogenic
*d. Odontogenic
e. Hematogenous

128. An employee has been sick for 4 months, further treatment is necessary, the patient is unable to work. Who is authorized to provide further disability examination of this patient?
*a. Sociomedical expert committee
b. Deputy chief physician responsible for disability examination
c. Chief physician of a medical facility
d. Physician in charge and the head of the department
e. Medical consultative board

129. A 23-year-old patient had taken 1 g of aspirin to treat acute respiratory infection. After that he developed an asthmatic fit with labored expiration that was arrested by introduction of aminophylline. The patient's medical history is not burdened with allergies. The patient has undergone two surgeries for nasal polyposis in the past. What diagnosis is most likely?
a. Infectious allergic bronchial asthma
b. Atopic bronchial asthma
c. Exercise-induced asthma
d. Symptomatic bronchospasm
*e. Aspirin-induced asthma

130. An 18-year-old patient always obeys others and adapts his needs to the demands of the people on whom he depends. He excessively defers to their wishes and makes them responsible for his wellbeing, cannot defend his interests and needs support from other people. Such psychic profile has been formed in the childhood, remains unchanged, and hinders adaptation. What psychic disorder is observed in this patient?
a. Anankastic personality disorder
b. Anxiety (avoidant) personality disorder
c. Markedly accentuated personality
d. Psychopathy-like state
*e. Dependent personality disorder

131. An 8-year-old child has a round spot up to 1.0 cm in diameter on the scalp. The skin in the area of the spot is pink and covered with small flour-like scales, the hair there is broken off at the length of 4-5 mm. The child's sister has a similar spot. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Systemic lupus erythematosus
*b. Microsporia
c. Scabies
d. Tinea versicolor
e. Psoriasis

132. A newborn child has been diagnosed with physiological jaundice. What symptom is characteristic of this health condition?
a. A recurrent increase in the intensity of jaundice
*b. Yellow color of the skin, appearing on day 2-3 of life
c. Jaundice that lasts more than 10 days
d. Jaundice, appearing within the first 24 hours of life
e. Colorless feces

133. Over the last two years, a 23-year-old woman has been noticing coldness of her fingers that become bluish-white and numb. After 5-10 minutes, her skin becomes red and the fingers become warm, which is accompanied by sharp pain. What is the provisional diagnosis in this case?
a. Arteriosclerosis obliterans
b. Buerger's disease
c. Obliterating endarteritis
*d. Raynaud's disease
e. Polyneuritis

134. A 29-year-old woman complains of a general weakness, increased fatigability, weight loss, and infrequent scanty periods. One year ago she had a childbirth, complicated with a massive bleeding. Objectively, the woman is asthenic, her skin is pale and dry, the hair cover is thin on her scalp and absent in her armpits. Her mammary glands and genitals are hypotrophic. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Anorexia nervosa
b. Hypoplastic anemia
c. Asthenoneurotic syndrome
*d. Sheehan's syndrome
e. Pituitary tumor

135. Having studied the relationship between the distance from villages to the local outpatient clinics and frequency of visits to the clinics among the rural population of this area, it was determined that the rank correlation coefficient in this case equals -0.9. How can this relationship be characterized?
a. Strong direct relationship
b. Moderate direct relationship
c. Moderate inverse relationship
d. -
*e. Strong inverse relationship

136. The influence of risk factors on the development of atherosclerosis in patients of different ages was being researched in a study. What kind of risk factor is the patient's age?
*a. Uncontrolled endogenous
b. Controlled social
c. Controlled exogenous
d. Uncontrolled exogenous
e. Controlled endogenous

137. A 55-year-old woman complains of a tumor-like formation that can be palpated in the kidney area on the left, moderate dull pain in her left side, periodical discharge of bright-red blood during urination. Objectively, the patient has lost weight, her skin is pale and dry. Palpation of the abdomen detects an elastic formation in the left renal region. The formation is mobile and painless. Urinalysis detects macrohematuria and atypical cells. Blood Hb is 82 g/L, ESR is 70 mm/hour. What is the most likely pathology, causing this clinical presentation?
a. Chronic pancreatitis
b. Tumor of the left ureter
*c. Tumor of the left kidney
d. Acute pyelonephritis
e. Tumor of the large intestine

138. A 63-year-old man came to a doctor with complaints of marked general weakness, poor appetite, weight loss, joint pain, and heaviness in the right subcostal area. Complete blood count shows the following: erythrocytes - 3.4·10^12/L, Hb - 102 g/L, color index - 0.9, platelets - 640·10^9 /L, leukocytes - 138·10^9/L, blasts -1 %, promyelocytes - 2 %, myelocytes - 13 %, juvenile - 12 %, band neutrophils - 16 %, segmented neutrophils - 31 %, basophils - 3 %, eosinophils - 8 %, lymphocytes - 9 %, monocytes - 5 %, ESR - 30 mm/hour. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Leukemoid reaction
b. Chronic lymphocytic leukemia
c. Acute leukemia
d. Erythremia (polycythemia vera)
*e. Chronic myeloid leukemia

139. A 32-year-old patient looks at the pattern on the wallpaper and sees the lines begin to move and form silhouettes of fantastic animals. Instead of a lighting fixture hanging from the ceiling, he sees a giant octopus. What psychopathological symptom is it?
a. Functional hallucinations
b. Visual hallucinations
c. Derealization
d. Pseudohallucinations
*e. Pareidolic illusions

140. A 28-year-old woman complains of weakness, dizziness, nosebleeds, and hemorrhages on her torso. The condition onset was 4 months ago. Objectively, her condition is of moderate severity. There are multicolored painless hemorrhages 1-2 cm in size on her back and abdomen. The peripheral lymph nodes are not enlarged. The liver is (-), the spleen is (+). Blood test shows the following: Нb - 120 g/L, erythrocytes - 3.4·10^12/L, color index - 0.9, reticulocytes - 0.9%, serum iron - 15.01 mcmol/L , leukocytes - 4.2·10^9/L, eosinophils - 2%, basophils - 0%, band neutrophils - 7%, segmented neutrophils - 40%, monocytes - 6%, lymphocytes - 45%, platelets - 47.1·10^9/L, ESR - 27 mm/hour. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Chronic lymphocytic leukemia
*b. Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura
c. Chronic iron-deficiency anemia
d. Hemolytic anemia
e. Hypoplastic anemia

141. You witnessed a car accident. When examining the place of the accident you noticed a man of about 30 years, who was hit by the car. He is unconscious. On his neck on the left there is a profuse hemorrhage with bright-red blood. How to stop this hemorrhage?
a. Apply a neck brace
b. Apply a plaster cast
c. Maximal hyperextension of the neck
*d. Digital occlusion, Mikulich method
e. Put him in a stable position

142. A 40-year-old victim of a traffic accident sustained the following injuries: closed diaphyseal femur fracture, brain concussion, multiple rib fractures, hemopneumothorax, degloving shin injuries. What injuries require the most urgent attention?
a. All injuries are equivalent
b. Closed diaphyseal femur fracture
c. Degloving shin injuries
d. Brain concussion
*e. Multiple rib fractures, hemopneumothorax

143. In medical business, the profit of a company must be included in the price of its medical services. What traditional criteria make up the term "price"?
a. Variable costs, cost price
b. Gross expenses, use value
*c. Cost price, profit, taxes
d. Profitability, income, fixed costs
e. The sum of all production costs

144. Anthropometric measurements are widely used to study the physical development of children and teenagers. What measurement is the functional one?
a. Determining the shape of the chest
b. Height measurement
*c. Measuring the vital capacity of the lungs
d. Determining the shape of the backbone
e. Weight measurement

145. A 26-year-old woman was hospitalized into the gynecological department with complaints of body temperature up to 38.2^oC, fever, general weakness, and dirty-red blood discharge from her genital tracts. She is hemodynamically stable. Two days ago she underwent a medical abortion on the 8th week of pregnancy. Ultrasound detects the remains of the fertilized egg in her uterine cavity. What are the tactics of the patient management in this case?
*a. Revision of the uterine cavity with vacuum aspirator. Antibiotic therapy
b. Uterine cavity treatment with antibiotic solutions
c. Laparotomy. Supravaginal uterine  amputation. Abdominal drainage
d. Laparotomy. Extirpation of the uterus and tubes. Abdominal drainage
e. Pipelle biopsy

146. A woman addressed a gynecologist on the 20th day of puerperal period with complaints of pain in the left mammary gland, puruent discharge from the nipple. Objectively: Ps- 120/min., body temperature is 39^oC) The left mammary gland is painful, larger than the right one, the skin there is hyperemic; in the upper quadrant there is an infiltrate 10x15 cm in size with soft center. Blood test: ESR- 50 mm/hour, leukocytes - 15,0· 10^9/l. What would be the treatment tactics?
a. Refer to a postnatal department
b. Lance the mammary gland abscess in a maternity department
c. Refer to a gynecology department
*d. Transfer to a surgical department for surgical treatment
e. Refer to a surgeon for conservative treatment

147. A 36-year-old woman complains of a headache, paresthesia, muscle weakness, spasms, thirst, and polyuria. Objectively, her temperature is 36.6^oС, respiration rate - 18/min., pulse - 92/min., blood pressure - 180/110 mm Hg. Her ECG shows ST depression. Her potassium levels in blood plasma are low, sodium levels are high, plasma renin activity is significantly decreased, aldosterone concentration is high. 24-hour urine specific gravity does not exceed 1.008-1.011, alkaline reaction is observed. Spironolactone test is positive. CT scan shows enlarged right adrenal gland. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
*a. Conn's syndrome
b. Diabetes insipidus
c. Cushing's syndrome
d. Pheochromocytoma
e. Androsteroma

148. A 38-year-old woman came to her family doctor with complaints of headache, irritability, insomnia, weight loss, and increased sweating. Objectively, her skin is warm and moist, she has hand tremors, the patient is asthenic, blood pressure - 120/80, heart rate - 90/min., body temperature - 36.6^oС, respiration is free and vesicular, heart sounds are rhythmic and clear. Ultrasound reveals thyroid gland enlargement. The doctor referred the woman to undergo a blood test for T3, T4, and TSH levels. What are the most likely results of the test?
a. Reduced levels of T3, increased levels of T4 and TSH
b. Reduced levels of T3 and T4, increased levels of TSH
c. Increased levels of T3, T4, and TSH
*d. Increased levels of T3 and T4, reduced levels of TSH
e. Reduced levels of T3, T4, and TSH

149. A child was born with the weight of 3250 g and the body length of 52 cm. At the age of 1.5 months, the child's actual body weight is sufficient (4350 g) and the psychophysical development corresponds with the child's age. The child is on breastfeeding. Periodical regurgitation is observed. What causes regurgitation in this child?
a. Pylorospasm
b. Pylorostenosis
c. Acute gastroenteritis
d. Esophageal atresia
*e. Aerophagia

150. A 17-year-old young man demands a plastic surgery. He thinks that it's impossible to live with such an ugly nose as his. He claims that wherever he is, everyone is laughing at him and mocking him behind his back. He walks with a cap pulled low over his face, turns his face downwards, and pulls up his scarf up to his eyes. Oblectively, there are no indications for rhinoplasty - the young man has a nearly classical shape of the nose. What psychopathological condition is it?
*a. Dysmorphomania
b. Hypochondriacal neurosis
c. Capgras syndrome
d. Intrusive thoughts
e. Body schema disorder

151. A 25-year-old man developed hematuria after an overexposure to cold. Objectively, his blood pressure is 160/110 mm Hg. Urinalysis reveals the following: proteinuria - 3.5 g/L, erythrocytes cover the entire vision field, there are 5-6 hyaline cylinders (casts) in sight. What diagnostic method would be most informative in this case?
a. Kidney biopsy
b. Cystoscopy
c. Kidney ultrasound
d. Tomography
e. Excretory urography

152. A 31-year-old woman complains of pain and swelling in her radiocarpal and metacarpophalangeal joints and morning stiffness for up to 1.5 hours. These signs are observed for the last 3 years. Two weeks ago she developed pain, swelling, and redness in her knee joints and fever of 37.5^oC) Examination of her internal organs shows no pathological changes. She was diagnosed with rheumatoid arthritis. What changes will most likely be visible on the X-ray scan of her joints?
a. Narrowing of the joint space,  subchondral osteosclerosis
b. Multiple marginal osteophytes
c. Narrowing of the joint space, usuras  (bone lesions)
d. Cysts in the subchondral bone
e. Osteolysis of the epiphyses

153. A 30-year-old woman complains of infertility throughout the past 7 years of regular sexual life without using contraceptives. Her menstruations started at the age of 14, last 5-7 days with intervals of 35-45 days, are painful, with moderate discharge. Gynecological examination shows that the external genitals are properly developed, the hair growth pattern is of a female type, the body of the uterus is reduced in size, formations 5x4 cm in size can be palpated on both sides in the area of the uterine appendages. The formations are dense, mobile, and painless. Functional diagnostic tests show that the basal temperature is monophasic. Ultrasound shows that the ovaries are covered with a thick shell. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Turner syndrome
b. Polycystic ovary syndrome
c. Genital tuberculosis
d. Ovarian cancer
e. Genital infantilism

154. A 23-year-old woman came to a doctor with complaints of headache, dizziness, chills, numbness and sharp weakness in her left arm - inability to hold objects. These complaints were increasing over the last year. Recently she had two episodes of loss of consciousness. During examination, the following is observed: no pulse on the left brachial and radial arteries; auscultation detects murmur over the left subclavian artery. Clinical blood test detects ESR of 45 mm/h. Angiography reveals occlusion of the left common carotid artery and partial stenosis (47%) of the left subclavian artery. Make the diagnosis.
a. Giant cell arteritis
b. Microscopic polyangiitis
c. Takayasu arteritis
d. Polyarteritis nodosa
e. Kawasaki arteritis

155. A secundipara woman developed bloody discharge from the vagina at the onset of the full-term delivery. Internal obstetric examination detected the following: the cervix is smoothed out, its external os is 6 cm wide, while its internal os is obstructed with a spongy tissue by 1/3. The amniotic sac is palpable through the rest of the cervical opening. The labor is active. What tactics should be chosen in this case?
a. Stimulation of the labor activity
b. Cesarean section
c. Termination of the pregnancy
d. Hemostatic therapy
e. Amniotomy

156. A newborn girl has congenital lymphoid edema of her hands and feet, a short neck with lymphoid edema that forms a skin fold, an anti-Mongoloid slant of the eyes, and an epicanthus. Sex chromatin (Barr's body) is absent in her buccal swab. What syndrome is most likely to be diagnosed in this case?
a. Down syndrome
b. Patau syndrome
c. Turner syndrome
d. Klinefelter syndrome
e. Edwards syndrome

157. What should be prescribed as secondary prevention drugs for a patient with atrial fibrillation after an ischemic stroke caused by cardiac embolism?
a. Calcium antagonists
b. Oral anticoagulants
c. beta-blockers
d. Aspirin or clopidogrel
e. Nootropics

158. A 20-year-old man was brought to a clinic on the 7th day of illness with complaints of icteric skin and sclerae, dark urine, one episode of vomiting, low appetite, and fever of 38^oC throughout the last 2 days. Three weeks ago he went fishing with friends, during which they all shared the same tableware. Objectively, he is inert, t^o - 36.8^oC, his skin and sclerae are icteric, the liver protrudes from under the edge of the costal arch by 3 cm and is tender on palpation; the spleen cannot be palpated. Patient's urine is dark, his feces are partially acholic. Make the diagnosis:
a. Leptospirosis
b. Intestinal yersiniosis
c. Viral hepatitis A
d. Infectious mononucleosis
e. Hemolytic anemia

159. A 13-year-old girl complains of fatigability, frequent headaches, cardialgia. Eight years ago she had a case of pyelonephritis. Urine analyses periodically revealed leukocyturia. The child has undergone no further treatment. On examination: increased BP up to 150/100 mm Hg. Ultrasound investigation revealed significant reduction of the right kidney. What process is leading in arterial hypertension pathogenesis in this case?
a. Disruption of water-electrolytic balance
b. Disruption of renal circulation
c. Hypersympathicotonia
d. Hyperactivity of renin-angiotensin system
e. Increased cortisol level

160. Examination of a 9-month-old girl revealed the following: flattened face, Mongoloid slant of the eyes, epicanthus, small auricles, underdeveloped upper jaw, high-arched palate, diastema, enlarged fissured tongue, short neck, transverse crease on both palms, sparse fingerprint whorls, coarctation of the aorta, and marked muscle hypotonia. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Congenital hypothyroidism
b. Patau syndrome
c. Edwards syndrome
d. Congenital toxoplasmosis
e. Down syndrome

161. A child is 4 months old. The disease onset was acute and manifested as a temperature of 37.8^oC and a slight cough. On the third day after the onset, the cough intensified and became accompanied by dyspnea. Percussion detects a tympanic sound over the lungs, while auscultation reveals numerous wet fine bubbling and sibilant wheezes during the exhalation. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Bronchopneumonia
b. Obstructive bronchitis
c. Acute bronchitis
d. Acute bronchiolitis
e. Focal pneumonia

162. A 25-year-old woman complains of a 2-month-long menstruation delay and bloody vaginal discharge. Gynecological examination detects that the cervix is "barrel-shaped", the uterus is in emphanteflexio, the body of the uterus is small and painless, the external os allows inserting a fingertip, the appendages are not palpable, the discharge is profuse and hemorrhagic. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Cervical pregnancy
b. Hydatidiform mole
c. Cervical erosion
d. Cervical cancer
e. Endometriosis

163. What food product can cause diphyllobotriasis, if insufficiently processed?
a. Beef
b. Pork
c. Poultry
d. Mutton
e. Fish

164. A 25-year-old woman has been hospitalized into the gynecology department with complaints of a fever of 38.5^oC, pain in her lower abdomen, and purulent discharge from the vagina. She became acutely ill one week after an artificial abortion. Objectively, the following is observed: pulse - 100/min., blood pressure - 110/70 mm Hg, soft abdomen, painful in its lower regions. Gynecological examination detected the following: the uterus is enlarged, soft, and painful; the appendages are unchanged; the vaginal fornix is free. Discharge from the vagina is profuse and purulent. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Lochiometra
b. Parametritis
c. Acute adnexitis
d. Pelvioperitonitis
e. Acute metroendometritis

165. A 45-year-old man has been suffering from duodenal ulcer disease for 5 years. He complains of weakness, dizziness, dryness of the skin. Objectively: the skin and visible mucosa are pale, chapped lips; heart rate is 100/min., BP- 100/70 mm Hg, systolic murmur at all points on heart auscultation. All other internal organs are unchanged. Fecal occult blood test is positive. Blood test: erythrocytes - 3,1· 10^12/l, Hb-  88 g/l, color index - 0,7, leukocytes - 4,6· 10^9/l, platelets - 350· 10^9/l, ESR- 21 mm/hour, anisocytosis, poikilocythemia, serum iron - 9,5 mcmol/l. What treatment tactics would you choose?
a. Iron preparations, balanced diet
b. Corticosteroids, cytostatics
c. Ascorbic acid, calcium chloride
d. Intramuscular introduction of 500 mkg of cyanocobalamin
e. Concentrated red cells transfusion

166. An 8-year-old girl gains no weight and has a distended abdomen and diarrhea that occurs up to 4-5 times per 24 hours. According to the patient's medical history, the symptoms first appeared at the age of 6 months, after the introduction of complementary food - oatmeal - into her diet. Since then, the child has been experiencing abdominal bloating, diarrhea, and loose stools after eating cereals and products containing flour. Coprology test detects steatorrhea. Fibrogastroduodenoscopy detects subatrophic duodenitis. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Mucoviscidosis
b. Celiac disease
c. Pancreatitis
d. Lactase deficiency
e. Functional dyspepsia

167. A 25-year-old woman complains of fever of 37^oC, pain in her lower abdomen, and vaginal discharge. Three days ago, at 10 weeks of pregnancy, an artificial abortion was performed. Objectively, the cervix is clean, the uterus is slightly enlarged and painful. The uterine appendages cannot be detected. The fornices are deep and painless. Sanguinopurulent discharge is being produced from the vagina. Make the diagnosis:
a. Uterine perforation after an abortion
b. Pelvioperitonitis
c. Hematometra
d. Postabortion metroendometritis
e. Parametritis

168. During regular examination of a 2-year-old boy, he presents with enlarged left kidney, painless on palpation. The right kidney was undetectable on palpation. Excretory urography shows no contrast on the right. Cytoscopy detected hemiatrophy of the urinary bladder trigone, the right ureteral orifice is not detected. What pathology is it?
a. Agenesis of the right kidney
b. Dystopia of the right kidney
c. Ectopic right ureteral orifice
d. Hypoplasia of the right kidney
e. Agenesis of the right ureter

169. An unconscious patient was delivered to a hospital by an ambulance. Objectively, his body temperature is 39^oC, he presents with convulsions and red dry skin. It is known that the patient works as a stoker in the boiler room. What is the likely diagnosis?
a. Heat stroke
b. Acute viral respiratory infection
c. CO poisoning
d. Hypertensive urgency
e. Acute food poisoning

170. A man complains of unbearable cough with putrid-smelling chocolate-colored purulent sputum. The discharge of sputum reaches 600 mL per 24 hours. The patient's history states that the disease onset was acute, with irregular fever and the body temperature reaching 39^oС. X-ray shows a shadowed area with a cavity in its center that has irregular contours and a fluid level. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Cavernous tuberculosis
b. Lung cancer with disintegration
c. Lung abscess
d. Pulmonary gangrene
e. Bronchiectasis

171. A 38-year-old man's workplace is within the area of effect of ionizing radiation. During regular medical check-up he expresses no complaints. Blood test: erythrocytes - 4,5· 10^12/l, Нb- 80 g/l, leukocytes - 2,8· 10^9/l, platelets - 30· 10^9/l. Can this person continue to work with sources of ionizing radiation?
a. Work with radioactive substances and other sources of radiation is contraindicated
b. Only work with low-level radioactive substances is allowed
c. Work with radioactive substances is allowed
d. Work with radioactive substances can be allowed after detailed medical examination
e. Work with radioactive substances is allowed only for limited periods of time

172. A 58-year-old woman came to the gynecological clinic. She complains of bloody discharge from her genital tracts. Menopause is 8 years. Gynecological examination: the uterus is slightly enlarged, dense to touch, with limited mobility; the uterine appendages cannot be detected; parametrium is free. Fractional curettage of the uterine cavity yields a significant amount of medullary substance in the scrape. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chorioepithelioma
b. Hormone-producing ovarian tumor
c. Adenomyosis
d. Uterine cervix cancer
e. Uterine corpus cancer

173. A 3-month-old child with signs of rickets presents with positive Chvostek, Trousseau, and Maslov signs. One day ago the parents witnessed a cyanotic attack in their child - the child broke into a cold sweat, the eyes bulged, and respiratory arrest occurred. One minute later the child drew in a loud breath and the child's condition normalized again. What is the cause of the described signs of the disease?
a. Increase of blood calcium levels
b. Decrease of blood phosphorus levels
c. Decrease of blood calcium levels
d. Metabolic acidosis
e. Increase of blood phosphorus levels

174. A woman with polycystic kidney disease observes an increase in her 24-hour urine output to 2-2.5 liters. Dynamic nephroscintigraphy shows the following: total glomerular filtration rate - 34 mL/min., serum creatinine - 84 mcmol/L, urea - 8.0 mmol/L. What stage of chronic kidney failure is it?
a. Latent
b. Polyuric
c. Terminal
d. Compensated
e. Intermittent

175. A 38-year-old woman complains of throbbing pain in the area of her external genitalia on the right, chills, and a fever of 38.5°С. Objectively, palpation detects a painful tumor-like formation covering the entrance to the vagina in the area of the lower third of the labia majora on the right. Marked edema and hyperemia are observed. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Acute bartholinitis
b. Acute vaginitis
c. Fibroma of the vulva
d. Acute vulvitis
e. Bartholin gland cyst

176. A 27-year-old woman complains of sharp pain in her lower abdomen and dizziness. Her last menstruation was 2 weeks ago. HCG test results are negative. Objectively, her skin is pale, blood pressure  -  80/60 mm Hg, pulse  -  92/min. The abdomen is tense, painful more on the right in its lower segments. Vaginal examination detects normal-sized uterus, the appendages are painful to palpation, the posterior fornix overhangs. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Pedicle torsion of an ovarian cyst
b. Ovarian apoplexy
c. Exacerbation of chronic right-sided adnexitis
d. Ectopic pregnancy
e. Acute appendicitis

177. A 22-year-old patient lies in bed with his head raised high and feels no discomfort in this position. He enters the conversation reluctantly, responds to whispered speech, gives one-word answers. His face is indifferent and hypomimic, the forehead is wrinkled, the lips are puckered. The patient moves very little and often freezes for a long time in an uncomfortable position. This condition has developed gradually over the course of a week with no apparent cause. What condition is observed in the patient?
a. Depressive substupor
b. Apathetic substupor
c. Exogenous stupor
d. Catatonic substupor
e. Psychogenic stupor

178. A 17-year-old girl complains of a pain in her knee and ankle joints and body temperature up to 39^oC) 2 weeks ago she had a case of acute tonsillitis. Objectively, her joints are swollen, sharply painful, and their mobility is reduced. On the skin of her trunk and limbs there are barely visible circle-shaped pale pink spots. Heart rate is 95/min., blood pressure is 90/60 mm Hg, heart sounds are weakened, there is a soft systolic noise over the apex. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Systemic scleroderma
b. Acute rheumatic fever
c. Rheumatoid arthritis
d. Erythema nodosum
e. Reactive arthritis

179. A patient complains of a rash on the trunk and flexor surfaces of the arms and of itching that intensifies in the evening and at night. Objectively, the patient has small (up to 12 mm in diameter) pink papules and vesicles, arranged in pairs, as well as excoriations, on the specified areas of the skin. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Eczema
b. Dermatitis
c. Scabies
d. Lichen ruber planus
e. Secondary papular syphilid

180. To assess the vitamin component of the students' nutrition status, the capillary resistance test and the tongue test with Tillmans' reagent were performed. In this case, the supply of the body with the following vitamin was tested:
a. B_2
b. B_1
c. С
d. А
e. РР

181. A 10-year-old girl was hospitalized with signs of carditis. According to her medical history, two weeks ago she had an exacerbation of chronic tonsillitis. What etiological factor is the most likely in this case?
a. Pneumococcus
b. Proteus
c. Klebsiella
d. Staphylococcus
e. Streptococcus

182. A 45-year-old patient suddenly fell ill with the onset of the disease manifesting as chills and a fever of 39.2^oС. In the evening, intense pain developed in the stomach and calf muscles. Two days later, the patient noticed that the skin and sclera are icteric. Objectively, the following is observed: severe condition, a fever of 39.9^oС, marked inertness, moderately icteric skin and sclera, multiple petechiae on the trunk, vesicular breathing, respiratory rate - 20/min., heart rate - 102/min., blood pressure - 100/60 mm Hg. The abdomen is soft, painful in the epigastrium. The liver protrudes 3 cm from under the costal arch. The 24-hour diuresis consists of 300 mL of dark urine. What is the provisional diagnosis in this case?
a. Sepsis
b. Leptospirosis
c. Infectious mononucleosis
d. Viral hepatitis B
e. Yersiniosis

183. A 35-year-old woman had acute onset of the disease that started with fever up to 39.0^oC and cough. 3 days later her dyspnea at rest increased up to 35/min. Downward from her right shoulder-blade angle, percussion detects a dull sound. No vocal fremitus, respiratory sounds cannot be auscultated. What is the treatment tactics?
a. Antibiotic therapy
b. Physiotherapy
c. Pleural tap
d. Oxygen therapy
e. Artificial lung ventilation

184. A 23-year-old woman, who works as a milk and dairy inspector, after the miscarriage suffers from high fever up to 38,6^oC, recurring chills, excessive sweating. Objectively: polyadenitis, pain in the lumbosacral spine, swollen left knee joint, enlarged liver and spleen. What diagnosis is most likely?
a. Toxoplasmosis
b. Yersiniosis
c. Brucellosis
d. Sepsis
e. Polyarticular rheumatoid arthritis

185. A 30-year-old man came to the family physician. 2 months ago he underwent a surgery for open fracture of the humerus. On examination the patient's condition is satisfactory; in the area of the postoperative wound there is a fistula that discharges a small amount of pus; the area itself is red; fluctuation is detected. X-ray shows destruction of the humerus with sequestra. What complication did the patient develop during the postoperative period?
a. Posttraumatic phlegmon
b. Wound suppuration
c. Posttraumatic osteomyelitis
d. Hematogenous osteomyelitis
e. Suture sinus

186. A regional cardiologist is tasked with the development of a plan for medioprophylactic measures aimed at decrease of cardiovascular mortality. What measures should be planned for secondary prevention?
a. Referring patients for in-patient treatment
b. Optimization of life style and living conditions
c. Prevention of recurrences and complications
d. Referring patients for sanatorium-and-spa treatment
e. Prevention of diseases

187. An 18-year-old adolescent bought at a store a salad with smoked fish, mushrooms, and mayonnaise. Six hours after eating the salad, he developed progressive weakness, vision impairment, "fog in the eyes", and problems with swallowing. He was hospitalized. Examination detects the body temperature of 36.0^oC and pale skin and mucosa. The patient is adynamic, answers questions sluggishly. The pupils are dilated, with reduced response to light. The patient's voice is hoarse, his oral mucosa is dry. What type of food poisoning can be suspected in this case?
a. Fish poisoning
b. Mushroom poisoning
c. Salmonellosis
d. Staphylococcal intoxication
e. Botulism

188. A 20-year-old student after failing an exam developed complaints of a sensation of a round foreign body in her throat, difficult swallowing. She fixates on her condition, limits her diet, often cries, seeks attention, exhibits  demonstrative attitude. She is highly susceptible to psychotherapeutic suggestion. What psychiatric diagnosis can be made in this case?
a. Hypochondriacal neurosis
b. Depressive neurosis
c. Hysterical neurosis
d. Paranoid personality disorder
e. Obsessive neurosis

189. A 42-year-old man was hospitalized 3 hours after an injury with marked subcutaneous emphysema of the upper torso, dyspnea, and tachycardia of 120/min. X-ray detects no pneumothorax, but shows a significant expansion of the mediastinum in both directions. What emergency aid must be provided in this case?
a. Thoracoscopy
b. Drainage of the anterior mediastinum
c. Thoracotomy
d. Drainage of the pleural cavity
e. Puncture of the pleural cavity

190. A 42-year-old man was delivered to a surgical in-patient department with complaints of icteric skin, pain in the right subcostal area. Biochemical blood analysis: total bilirubin - 140 mcmol/l, direct bilirubin - 112 mcmol/l. On US: choledoch duct - 1,4 cm, a concrement is detected in the distal area. Gallbladder is 40 cm, no concrements. What treatment tactics should be chosen?
a. Threatment in an infectious diseases hospital
b. Endoscopic papillosphincterotomy
c. Laparotomy with cholecystectomy
d. Laparoscopic cholecystectomy
e. Laparotomy with choledoch duct drain

191. A 2-month-old girl is being transferred to formula feeding. She was born with the body weight of 3500 g. Currently, her body weight is 3900 g. What is the normal daily volume of feeding for this baby?
a. 730 mL
b. 650 mL
c. 600 mL
d. 690 mL
e. 750 mL

192. A 32-year-old man lives in an area that is endemic for echinococcosis. For the last 6 months he has been suffering from pain in his right subcostal region and fever. Echinococcal liver damage is suspected. What study will be the most informative in this case?
a. Biochemical testing
b. Ultrasound examination
c. Liver scan
d. Angiography
e. Survey X-ray-of the abdominal cavity

193. A 58-year-old man, a heavy drinker and smoker, came to a hospital with complaints of constant coughing and shortness of breath. Lately, he has been losing weight. Objectively, his cervical lymph nodes are enlarged and dense, the tissues above them exhibit no tension. Chest X-ray shows fibrosis of an upper pulmonary lobe and left-sided pleurisy. The pleural fluid is straw-colored, with protein levels of 52 g/L and a high lymphocyte count. Malignant cells were not detected. Inoculation of the pleural fluid produced no microbial growth one week later. Make the diagnosis:
a. Atypical pneumonia
b. Bronchiectasis
c. Pulmonary tuberculosis
d. Systemic lupus erythematosus
e. Sarcoidosis

194. A 42-year-old woman has lost her consciousness after physical exertion. Her blood pressure decreased to 40/20 mm Hg. According to the patient's medical history, she has been taking glucocorticoids for a long time (5 years) because of her bronchial asthma. She has not been taking glucocorticoids for the last 4 days. Objectively, the patient is sluggish, her skin is of normal color, her heart sounds are muffled, her pulse is 100/min., rhythmic, of poor volume. Blood glucose levels - 3.0 mmol/L, Na^+ - 117 mmol/L, K^+ - 6.0 mmol/L. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Cardiogenic shock
b. Hypovolemic shock
c. Hypoglycemic coma
d. Thyrotoxic crisis
e. Acute adrenal insufficiency

195. A 32-year-old man came to a doctor on day 5 after the onset of the disease. He complains of a fever of 39.8°C, headache, pain in the calf muscles, pain in the back, and lumbar pain. Objectively, the face is hyperemic, the sclera is icteric, hemorrhages are observed on the skin of the torso and limbs. The patient presents with hepatosplenomegaly. The sign of costovertebral angle tenderness is positive. Diuresis - 450 mL. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Leptospirosis
b. Infectious mononucleosis
c. Measles
d. Typhus
e. Brucellosis

196. A 20-year-old patient complains of eye redness, lacrimation, moderate purulent discharge from the conjunctival sac, and the sensation of a foreign body in the eyes. Objectively, hyperemia of the conjunctiva of the eyelids is observed. Conjunctival injection was detected on the eyeballs. The cornea is transparent. The pupils are 3 mm in diameter, their light response is lively. The lens and vitreous body are transparent. The fundus is normal. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Acute bacterial conjunctivitis
b. Allergic conjunctivitis
c. Adenoviral keratoconjunctivitis
d. Gonoblenorrhea
e. Acute iridocyclitis

197. A 42-year-old man complains of weakness, palpitations, nosebleeds, and skin hemorrhages. His condition progressively deteriorates throughout the last month. Objectively, his condition is severe, he has petechial and spotted hemorrhages on the skin of his limbs and torso, lymph nodes and spleen are not palpable, the pulse is 116/min., the liver is +2 cm. Complete blood count reveals pancytopenia. What disease can be primarily suspected in this case?
a. Hypoplastic anemia
b. Acute agranulocytosis
c. Hemorrhagic vasculitis
d. Acute leukemia
e. Werlhof disease

198. A 9-year-old boy fell off a tree and hit the back of his head. A brief loss of consciousness was observed. The child's condition is satisfactory, he has a headache and vertigo. Skull X-ray scans show a depressed fracture of the occipital bone in the area of the external occipital protuberance. What treatment tactics is indicated for this patient?
a. Anti-inflammatory therapy
b. Surgical intervention
c. Lumbar puncture to relieve the pressure
d. Hemostatic therapy
e. Complex conservative treatment

199. A patient complains of pain, photophobia, lacrimation, and impaired vision in the right eye. The visual acuity of the right eye is 0.5, cannot be corrected, the visual acuity of the left eye is 1.0. Objectively, the palpebral fissure is narrowed in the right eye, pericorneal injection of the eyeball is observed. Precipitates were detected on the posterior corneal surface. The pupil is narrowed, the response to light is slowed. Floating opacities are observed in the anterior part of the vitreous body. The fundus is normal. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Acute keratitis
b. Posterior uveitis
c. Acute glaucoma attack
d. Bacterial conjunctivitis
e. Acute iridocyclitis

200. A 9-year-old boy is in a severe condition. His body temperature is 38-39^oC, he has nosebleeds and complains of pain in his bones. Objectively, the boy presents with acute pallor, hemorrhagic rash, and ulcerative necrotizing stomatitis. All the groups of lymph nodes are enlarged. The liver is +5 cm. The spleen is +4 cm. What test will be decisive for diagnosis-making in this case?
a. X-ray of the mediastinum
b. Myelogram
c. Immune complex testing
d. Abdominal ultrasound
e. Complete blood count

