1. 2 days after a hunter cut a ground squirrel's body, he developed fever up to 39^oC, his lymph nodes enlarged. Later he developed pneumonia with serohemorrhagic exudate that contained egg-shaped microorganisms with bipolar staining. What provisional diagnosis can be made in this case?
*a. Plague
b. Anthrax
c. Brucellosis
d. Tetanus
e. Pseudotuberculosis
2. 2 days after a hunter cut a ground squirrel's body, he developed fever up to 39^oC, his lymph nodes enlarged. Later he developed pneumonia with serohemorrhagic exudate that contained egg-shaped microorganisms with bipolar staining. What provisional diagnosis can be made in this case?
a. Brucellosis
b. Pseudotuberculosis
c. Tetanus
d. Anthrax
*e. Plague
3. 2 days after a hunter cut a ground squirrel's body, he developed fever up to 39^oC, his lymph nodes enlarged. Later he developed pneumonia with serohemorrhagic exudate that contained egg-shaped microorganisms with bipolar staining. What provisional diagnosis can be made in this case?
a. Tetanus
b. Brucellosis
*c. Plague
d. Anthrax
e. Pseudotuberculosis
4. 2 months after a kidney transplantation, the patient's condition deteriorated. Based on laboratory analysis, it was determined that transplant rejection started. What factor of the immune system plays the key role in the reaction of transplant rejection?
a. B lymphocytes
*b. T killer cells
c. T helper 2 cells
d. Interleukin-1
e. Natural killer cells
5. 2 months after a kidney transplantation, the patient's condition deteriorated. Based on laboratory analysis, it was determined that transplant rejection started. What factor of the immune system plays the key role in the reaction of transplant rejection?
a. B lymphocytes
b. Interleukin-1
c. Natural killer cells
d. T helper 2 cells
*e. T killer cells
6. 2 months after a kidney transplantation, the patient's condition deteriorated. Based on laboratory analysis, it was determined that transplant rejection started. What factor of the immune system plays the key role in the reaction of transplant rejection?
a. T helper 2 cells
b. B lymphocytes
c. Natural killer cells
*d. T killer cells
e. Interleukin-1
7. 30 minutes after dental treatment the patient developed red itching spots on the face and oral mucosa. The patient was diagnosed with urticaria. What bioactive substance with vasodilating and pruriginous effect is produced during this type of allergic reaction?
*a. Histamine
b. Bradykinin
c. Prostaglandin E2
d. Interleukin-1
e. Leukotriene B4
8. 30 minutes after dental treatment the patient developed red itching spots on the face and oral mucosa. The patient was diagnosed with urticaria. What bioactive substance with vasodilating and pruriginous effect is produced during this type of allergic reaction?
a. Interleukin-1
b. Prostaglandin E2
c. Leukotriene B4
d. Bradykinin
*e. Histamine
9. 30 minutes after dental treatment the patient developed red itching spots on the face and oral mucosa. The patient was diagnosed with urticaria. What bioactive substance with vasodilating and pruriginous effect is produced during this type of allergic reaction?
a. Prostaglandin E2
b. Leukotriene B4
c. Interleukin-1
*d. Histamine
e. Bradykinin
10. A 1.5-year-old child on examination has deformed legs and foci of thickening in the area of the ribs and wrists. A dentist pointed out the late eruption of teeth, disturbed order of tooth eruption, uneven mineralization of the enamel and dentin, and horizontal configuration of the upper jaw that forms a high-arched palate. What disease developed in this child?
*a. Rickets
b. Gout
c. Osteoporosis
d. Fluorosis
e. Sialolithiasis
11. A 1.5-year-old child on examination has deformed legs and foci of thickening in the area of the ribs and wrists. A dentist pointed out the late eruption of teeth, disturbed order of tooth eruption, uneven mineralization of the enamel and dentin, and horizontal configuration of the upper jaw that forms a high-arched palate. What disease developed in this child?
a. Gout
b. Fluorosis
*c. Rickets
d. Sialolithiasis
e. Osteoporosis
12. A 1.5-year-old child on examination has deformed legs and foci of thickening in the area of the ribs and wrists. A dentist pointed out the late eruption of teeth, disturbed order of tooth eruption, uneven mineralization of the enamel and dentin, and horizontal configuration of the upper jaw that forms a high-arched palate. What disease developed in this child?
a. Osteoporosis
*b. Rickets
c. Fluorosis
d. Gout
e. Sialolithiasis
13. A 1.5-year-old child with signs of nitrate poisoning was brought to the admission department with persistent cyanosis, dyspnea, and convulsions. What form of hemoglobin causes these signs?
*a. Methemoglobin
b. Carboxyhemoglobin
c. Reduced hemoglobin
d. Carbhemoglobin
e. Oxyhemoglobin
14. A 1.5-year-old child with signs of nitrate poisoning was brought to the admission department with persistent cyanosis, dyspnea, and convulsions. What form of hemoglobin causes these signs?
a. Reduced hemoglobin
*b. Methemoglobin
c. Oxyhemoglobin
d. Carbhemoglobin
e. Carboxyhemoglobin
15. A 1.5-year-old child with signs of nitrate poisoning was brought to the admission department with persistent cyanosis, dyspnea, and convulsions. What form of hemoglobin causes these signs?
a. Reduced hemoglobin
b. Carboxyhemoglobin
*c. Methemoglobin
d. Carbhemoglobin
e. Oxyhemoglobin
16. A 10-day-old child has undergone a surgery to repair cleft upper lip (''hare-lip''). Cleft upper lip has resulted from the following in this case:
a. Nonclosure of maxillary and mandibular processes of the first pharyngeal arch
b. Nonclosure of palatine tori of maxillary processes of the first pharyngeal arch
*c. Nonclosure of frontal and maxillary processes of the first pharyngeal arch
d. Nonclosure of the second pharyngeal arch
e. Nonclosure of the third pharyngeal arch
17. A 10-day-old child has undergone a surgery to repair cleft upper lip (''hare-lip''). Cleft upper lip has resulted from the following in this case:
a. Nonclosure of the second pharyngeal arch
*b. Nonclosure of frontal and maxillary processes of the first pharyngeal arch
c. Nonclosure of maxillary and mandibular processes of the first pharyngeal arch
d. Nonclosure of the third pharyngeal arch
e. Nonclosure of palatine tori of maxillary processes of the first pharyngeal arch
18. A 12-year-old child complains of difficulty breathing through the nose. Examination revealed that this condition had been caused by persistent hypertrophy of the lymphoid tissue. What tonsil is likely to be enlarged in this case, as indicated by these pathological changes?
*a. Pharyngeal tonsil
b. Right tubal tonsil
c. Palatine tonsil
d. Left tubal tonsil
e. Lingual tonsil
19. A 12-year-old child complains of difficulty breathing through the nose. Examination revealed that this condition had been caused by persistent hypertrophy of the lymphoid tissue. What tonsil is likely to be enlarged in this case, as indicated by these pathological changes?
a. Left tubal tonsil
*b. Pharyngeal tonsil
c. Right tubal tonsil
d. Lingual tonsil
e. Palatine tonsil
20. A 12-year-old child complains of difficulty breathing through the nose. Examination revealed that this condition had been caused by persistent hypertrophy of the lymphoid tissue. What tonsil is likely to be enlarged in this case, as indicated by these pathological changes?
a. Lingual tonsil
b. Palatine tonsil
*c. Pharyngeal tonsil
d. Left tubal tonsil
e. Right tubal tonsil
21. A 12-year-old girl has an ulcer 5 mm in diameter at the bottom of her oral cavity. The ulcer is surrounded with a bright red tissue that pales when pressed. An ulcer biopsy was performed. Microscopy revealed a tumor composed of numerous blood-filled cavities. The cavities are lined with a single layer of endothelial cells. Between them there is stroma, made up of loose connective tissue. What type of tumor can be characterized by such clinical and laboratory findings?
*a. Ulcerated cavernous hemangioma
b. Ulcerated melanoblastoma
c. Non-keratinizing squamous cell  carcinoma
d. Rhabdomyosarcoma with secondary  changes
e. Giant cell tumor of bone
22. A 12-year-old girl has an ulcer 5 mm in diameter at the bottom of her oral cavity. The ulcer is surrounded with a bright red tissue that pales when pressed. An ulcer biopsy was performed. Microscopy revealed a tumor composed of numerous blood-filled cavities. The cavities are lined with a single layer of endothelial cells. Between them there is stroma, made up of loose connective tissue. What type of tumor can be characterized by such clinical and laboratory findings?
a. Rhabdomyosarcoma with secondary  changes
*b. Ulcerated cavernous hemangioma
c. Non-keratinizing squamous cell  carcinoma
d. Ulcerated melanoblastoma
e. Giant cell tumor of bone
23. A 12-year-old girl has an ulcer 5 mm in diameter at the bottom of her oral cavity. The ulcer is surrounded with a bright red tissue that pales when pressed. An ulcer biopsy was performed. Microscopy revealed a tumor composed of numerous blood-filled cavities. The cavities are lined with a single layer of endothelial cells. Between them there is stroma, made up of loose connective tissue. What type of tumor can be characterized by such clinical and laboratory findings?
a. Ulcerated melanoblastoma
b. Rhabdomyosarcoma with secondary  changes
*c. Ulcerated cavernous hemangioma
d. Giant cell tumor of bone
e. Non-keratinizing squamous cell  carcinoma
24. A 13-year-old girl is an in-patient at the hematology department of the regional children's hospital. She was diagnosed with iron-deficiency anemia. What type of hypoxia does this patient have?
a. Respiratory
b. Circulatory
c. Mixed
*d. Hemic
e. Tissue
25. A 13-year-old girl is an in-patient at the hematology department of the regional children's hospital. She was diagnosed with iron-deficiency anemia. What type of hypoxia does this patient have?
a. Respiratory
b. Circulatory
c. Tissue
*d. Hemic
e. Mixed
26. A 13-year-old girl is an in-patient at the hematology department of the regional children's hospital. She was diagnosed with iron-deficiency anemia. What type of hypoxia does this patient have?
a. Tissue
b. Circulatory
c. Mixed
*d. Hemic
e. Respiratory
27. A 14-year-old patient presents with disturbed twilight vision. What vitamin is deficient in the body of this patient?
a. C
b. B_1
*c. A
d. B_12
e. B_6
28. A 14-year-old patient presents with disturbed twilight vision. What vitamin is deficient in the body of this patient?
a. C
b. B_6
c. B_1
*d. A
e. B_12
29. A 16-year-old girl, who has been starving herself for a long time to lose weight, developed an edema. This phenomenon is mainly caused by:
*a. Hypoproteinemia due to protein synthesis disturbance
b. Decreased production of vasopressin in the hypothalamus
c. Deceleration of glomerular filtration rate
d. Hypoglycemia due to glycogen synthesis disturbance
e. Venous congestion and increased venous pressure
30. A 16-year-old girl, who has been starving herself for a long time to lose weight, developed an edema. This phenomenon is mainly caused by:
a. Deceleration of glomerular filtration rate
b. Decreased production of vasopressin in the hypothalamus
*c. Hypoproteinemia due to protein synthesis disturbance
d. Venous congestion and increased venous pressure
e. Hypoglycemia due to glycogen synthesis disturbance
31. A 16-year-old girl, who has been starving herself for a long time to lose weight, developed an edema. This phenomenon is mainly caused by:
a. Deceleration of glomerular filtration rate
b. Venous congestion and increased venous pressure
c. Decreased production of vasopressin in the hypothalamus
*d. Hypoproteinemia due to protein synthesis disturbance
e. Hypoglycemia due to glycogen synthesis disturbance
32. A 2-month-old child has been diagnosed with cri-du-chat syndrome. This disease is caused by deletion of the short arm of autosome 5. What is the total number of chromosomes in this child?
a. 23
b. 47
*c. 46
d. 44
e. 45
33. A 2-month-old child has been diagnosed with cri-du-chat syndrome. This disease is caused by deletion of the short arm of autosome 5. What is the total number of chromosomes in this child?
a. 44
b. 47
c. 23
d. 45
*e. 46
34. A 2-month-old child has been diagnosed with cri-du-chat syndrome. This disease is caused by deletion of the short arm of autosome 5. What is the total number of chromosomes in this child?
a. 47
b. 44
c. 23
d. 45
*e. 46
35. A 2-month-old girl has been diagnosed with cri-du-chat syndrome. This condition is caused by the deletion of the short arm of chromosome 5. What total number of chromosomes will be detected in this child?
*a. 46
b. 47
c. 45
d. 44
e. 23
36. A 2-month-old girl has been diagnosed with cri-du-chat syndrome. This condition is caused by the deletion of the short arm of chromosome 5. What total number of chromosomes will be detected in this child?
a. 44
*b. 46
c. 23
d. 45
e. 47
37. A 2-month-old girl has been diagnosed with cri-du-chat syndrome. This condition is caused by the deletion of the short arm of chromosome 5. What total number of chromosomes will be detected in this child?
a. 47
b. 44
c. 45
*d. 46
e. 23
38. A 2-year-old child with a history of URTI, who died with signs of cardiopulmonary failure, has hyperemic right lung. In segments 2, 6, and 10 on the surface and on section there are irregular-shaped yellow airless foci, with their size varying from several millimeters to 1 cm. Microscopy shows that in these portions of pulmonary tissue the alveoli, bronchioles, and small bronchi contain exudate with predominance of neutrophils. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Focal pneumonia
b. Pulmonary abscess
c. Interstitial pneumonia
d. Croupous pneumonia
e. Acute bronchitis
39. A 2-year-old child with a history of URTI, who died with signs of cardiopulmonary failure, has hyperemic right lung. In segments 2, 6, and 10 on the surface and on section there are irregular-shaped yellow airless foci, with their size varying from several millimeters to 1 cm. Microscopy shows that in these portions of pulmonary tissue the alveoli, bronchioles, and small bronchi contain exudate with predominance of neutrophils. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Croupous pneumonia
b. Acute bronchitis
*c. Focal pneumonia
d. Pulmonary abscess
e. Interstitial pneumonia
40. A 2-year-old child with a history of URTI, who died with signs of cardiopulmonary failure, has hyperemic right lung. In segments 2, 6, and 10 on the surface and on section there are irregular-shaped yellow airless foci, with their size varying from several millimeters to 1 cm. Microscopy shows that in these portions of pulmonary tissue the alveoli, bronchioles, and small bronchi contain exudate with predominance of neutrophils. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Pulmonary abscess
b. Acute bronchitis
c. Interstitial pneumonia
*d. Focal pneumonia
e. Croupous pneumonia
41. A 20-year-old pregnant woman has a round reddish formation with ulceration on its surface on the vestibular surface of the gums in her incisor region. Microscopy detects in this formation a similarity to a capillary hemangioma. What diagnosis is likely in this case?
*a. Angiomatous epulis
b. Fibroma
c. Fibrous epulis
d. Giant cell epulis
e. Papilloma
42. A 20-year-old pregnant woman has a round reddish formation with ulceration on its surface on the vestibular surface of the gums in her incisor region. Microscopy detects in this formation a similarity to a capillary hemangioma. What diagnosis is likely in this case?
a. Fibroma
b. Papilloma
c. Giant cell epulis
d. Fibrous epulis
*e. Angiomatous epulis
43. A 20-year-old pregnant woman has a round reddish formation with ulceration on its surface on the vestibular surface of the gums in her incisor region. Microscopy detects in this formation a similarity to a capillary hemangioma. What diagnosis is likely in this case?
a. Fibrous epulis
b. Giant cell epulis
c. Fibroma
*d. Angiomatous epulis
e. Papilloma
44. A 20-year-old woman came to the doctor with complaints of general weight loss, loss of appetite, weakness, skin discoloration resembling bronze tan. In addtition to hyperpigmentation, examination in the hospital revealed bilateral adrenal tuberculosis. What substance leads to skin hyperpigmentation, when accumulated excessively?
*a. Melanin
b. Hemozoin
c. Bilirubin
d. Adrenochrome
e. Lipofuscin
45. A 20-year-old woman came to the doctor with complaints of general weight loss, loss of appetite, weakness, skin discoloration resembling bronze tan. In addtition to hyperpigmentation, examination in the hospital revealed bilateral adrenal tuberculosis. What substance leads to skin hyperpigmentation, when accumulated excessively?
a. Adrenochrome
b. Lipofuscin
c. Bilirubin
*d. Melanin
e. Hemozoin
46. A 20-year-old woman came to the doctor with complaints of general weight loss, loss of appetite, weakness, skin discoloration resembling bronze tan. In addtition to hyperpigmentation, examination in the hospital revealed bilateral adrenal tuberculosis. What substance leads to skin hyperpigmentation, when accumulated excessively?
a. Hemozoin
b. Lipofuscin
c. Bilirubin
d. Adrenochrome
*e. Melanin
47. A 20-year-old young man was preventively given an anatoxin. It was an immunization against the following disease:
a. Meningitis
b. Pertussis
*c. Diphtheria
d. Tuberculosis
e. Scarlet fever
48. A 20-year-old young man was preventively given an anatoxin. It was an immunization against the following disease:
a. Meningitis
b. Pertussis
c. Scarlet fever
*d. Diphtheria
e. Tuberculosis
49. A 20-year-old young man was preventively given an anatoxin. It was an immunization against the following disease:
a. Scarlet fever
b. Tuberculosis
*c. Diphtheria
d. Pertussis
e. Meningitis
50. A 22-year-old man was brought into the inpatient department with complaints of fever and weakness. One of his enlarged cervical lymph nodes was excised for histological analysis. In the tissues of the lymph node there are necrotic foci surrounded with epithelioid cells, Langhans multinucleated giant cells, and lymphocytes. What disease can be suspected in this case?
a. Lymphogranulomatosis
b. Syphilis
c. Lymphatic leukemia
d. Sarcoidosis
*e. Tuberculosis
51. A 22-year-old man was brought into the inpatient department with complaints of fever and weakness. One of his enlarged cervical lymph nodes was excised for histological analysis. In the tissues of the lymph node there are necrotic foci surrounded with epithelioid cells, Langhans multinucleated giant cells, and lymphocytes. What disease can be suspected in this case?
a. Syphilis
*b. Tuberculosis
c. Lymphogranulomatosis
d. Lymphatic leukemia
e. Sarcoidosis
52. A 22-year-old man was brought into the inpatient department with complaints of fever and weakness. One of his enlarged cervical lymph nodes was excised for histological analysis. In the tissues of the lymph node there are necrotic foci surrounded with epithelioid cells, Langhans multinucleated giant cells, and lymphocytes. What disease can be suspected in this case?
a. Syphilis
b. Sarcoidosis
c. Lymphogranulomatosis
d. Lymphatic leukemia
*e. Tuberculosis
53. A 23-year-old man developed a perforation in his hard palate, a dense formation with clear margins was detected in this area. After a surgery, microscopy of the excised formation shows there a large focus of caseous necrosis surrounded with a granulation tissue with endovasculitis and a cellular infiltration consisting of lymphocytes and epithelioid cells with predominance of plasma cells. What is the most likely disease in this case?
a. Leprosy
b. Tuberculosis
*c. Syphilis
d. Scleroma
e. Sarcoma
54. A 23-year-old man developed a perforation in his hard palate, a dense formation with clear margins was detected in this area. After a surgery, microscopy of the excised formation shows there a large focus of caseous necrosis surrounded with a granulation tissue with endovasculitis and a cellular infiltration consisting of lymphocytes and epithelioid cells with predominance of plasma cells. What is the most likely disease in this case?
a. Leprosy
b. Tuberculosis
c. Sarcoma
d. Scleroma
*e. Syphilis
55. A 23-year-old man developed a perforation in his hard palate, a dense formation with clear margins was detected in this area. After a surgery, microscopy of the excised formation shows there a large focus of caseous necrosis surrounded with a granulation tissue with endovasculitis and a cellular infiltration consisting of lymphocytes and epithelioid cells with predominance of plasma cells. What is the most likely disease in this case?
a. Sarcoma
b. Tuberculosis
*c. Syphilis
d. Leprosy
e. Scleroma
56. A 23-year-old man with a cerebrocranial trauma was hospitalized in a severe condition. His respiration has a characteristically labored spasmodic inspiration that does not stop and only rarely is interrupted by an expiration. What type of respiration is it characteristic of?
a. Biot respiration
*b. Apneustic respiration
c. Kussmaul respiration
d. Gasping respiration
e. Cheyne-Stokes respiration
57. A 23-year-old man with a cerebrocranial trauma was hospitalized in a severe condition. His respiration has a characteristically labored spasmodic inspiration that does not stop and only rarely is interrupted by an expiration. What type of respiration is it characteristic of?
a. Cheyne-Stokes respiration
b. Kussmaul respiration
*c. Apneustic respiration
d. Biot respiration
e. Gasping respiration
58. A 23-year-old man with a cerebrocranial trauma was hospitalized in a severe condition. His respiration has a characteristically labored spasmodic inspiration that does not stop and only rarely is interrupted by an expiration. What type of respiration is it characteristic of?
a. Gasping respiration
b. Biot respiration
*c. Apneustic respiration
d. Cheyne-Stokes respiration
e. Kussmaul respiration
59. A 24-year-old man died of acute cardiopulmonary failure. During the last two days he complained of a cough with a small amount of <<rusty>> sputum, chest pain on the right that intensified sharply during breathing, and a fever of 39^oC) Autopsy of the body revealed red, dense, and airless lower pulmonary lobes; the pleura is covered in fibrin threads and membranes. The deceased was diagnosed with bilateral pleuropneumonia of the lower pulmonary lobes. What stage of pneumonia was most likely in this man?
*a. Red hepatization
b. -
c. Congestion
d. Gray hepatization
e. Resolution
60. A 24-year-old man died of acute cardiopulmonary failure. During the last two days he complained of a cough with a small amount of <<rusty>> sputum, chest pain on the right that intensified sharply during breathing, and a fever of 39^oC) Autopsy of the body revealed red, dense, and airless lower pulmonary lobes; the pleura is covered in fibrin threads and membranes. The deceased was diagnosed with bilateral pleuropneumonia of the lower pulmonary lobes. What stage of pneumonia was most likely in this man?
a. -
b. Congestion
*c. Red hepatization
d. Gray hepatization
e. Resolution
61. A 24-year-old man died of acute cardiopulmonary failure. During the last two days he complained of a cough with a small amount of <<rusty>> sputum, chest pain on the right that intensified sharply during breathing, and a fever of 39^oC) Autopsy of the body revealed red, dense, and airless lower pulmonary lobes; the pleura is covered in fibrin threads and membranes. The deceased was diagnosed with bilateral pleuropneumonia of the lower pulmonary lobes. What stage of pneumonia was most likely in this man?
a. Congestion
*b. Red hepatization
c. Gray hepatization
d. Resolution
e. -
62. A 25-year-old man has lost all sensitivity due to damage of his peripheral nerves. Name this disorder:
a. -
*b. Anesthesia
c. Ataxia
d. Hyperesthesia
e. Hypoesthesia
63. A 25-year-old man has lost all sensitivity due to damage of his peripheral nerves. Name this disorder:
a. -
b. Hyperesthesia
c. Hypoesthesia
*d. Anesthesia
e. Ataxia
64. A 25-year-old man has lost all sensitivity due to damage of his peripheral nerves. Name this disorder:
a. Ataxia
*b. Anesthesia
c. Hyperesthesia
d. -
e. Hypoesthesia
65. A 25-year-old man undergoes dental procedures. Several minutes after his oral cavity was lavaged with a furacilin (nitrofural) solution, he developed markedly swollen lips. What type of allergic reaction is observed in this case?
a. Cytolytic
*b. Anaphylactic
c. Delayed-type hypersensitivity
d. Stimulating
e. Immune complex
66. A 25-year-old man undergoes dental procedures. Several minutes after his oral cavity was lavaged with a furacilin (nitrofural) solution, he developed markedly swollen lips. What type of allergic reaction is observed in this case?
a. Delayed-type hypersensitivity
b. Immune complex
c. Stimulating
*d. Anaphylactic
e. Cytolytic
67. A 25-year-old man undergoes dental procedures. Several minutes after his oral cavity was lavaged with a furacilin (nitrofural) solution, he developed markedly swollen lips. What type of allergic reaction is observed in this case?
a. Stimulating
b. Cytolytic
c. Delayed-type hypersensitivity
*d. Anaphylactic
e. Immune complex
68. A 25-year-old patient has been hospitalized with complaints of headache, purulent discharge from the nasal cavity, and difficulty breathing through the nose. X-ray revealed inflammation in the region of the right maxillary sinus. Into which nasal meatus will the pathological fluid be discharged in this case?
a. Right inferior nasal meatus
b. Right superior nasal meatus
c. Right common nasal meatus
*d. Right middle nasal meatus
e. Right supreme nasal meatus
69. A 25-year-old patient has been hospitalized with complaints of headache, purulent discharge from the nasal cavity, and difficulty breathing through the nose. X-ray revealed inflammation in the region of the right maxillary sinus. Into which nasal meatus will the pathological fluid be discharged in this case?
a. Right supreme nasal meatus
*b. Right middle nasal meatus
c. Right inferior nasal meatus
d. Right superior nasal meatus
e. Right common nasal meatus
70. A 25-year-old patient has been hospitalized with complaints of headache, purulent discharge from the nasal cavity, and difficulty breathing through the nose. X-ray revealed inflammation in the region of the right maxillary sinus. Into which nasal meatus will the pathological fluid be discharged in this case?
a. Right supreme nasal meatus
b. Right superior nasal meatus
c. Right inferior nasal meatus
d. Right common nasal meatus
*e. Right middle nasal meatus
71. A 25-year-old patient has marked muscle weakness. What electrolytes in the blood plasma should be measured first?
a. Magnesium ions
b. Chlorine ions
c. Sodium ions
d. Potassium ions
*e. Calcium ions
72. A 25-year-old patient has marked muscle weakness. What electrolytes in the blood plasma should be measured first?
a. Potassium ions
b. Sodium ions
c. Chlorine ions
d. Magnesium ions
*e. Calcium ions
73. A 25-year-old patient has marked muscle weakness. What electrolytes in the blood plasma should be measured first?
a. Sodium ions
b. Potassium ions
*c. Calcium ions
d. Magnesium ions
e. Chlorine ions
74. A 25-year-old young man complains of general weakness, rapid fatigability, irritability, reduced working ability, and bleeding gums. What vitamin deficiency is the most likely cause of this condition?
a. Folic acid
*b. Ascorbic acid
c. Riboflavin
d. Retinol
e. Thiamine
75. A 25-year-old young man complains of general weakness, rapid fatigability, irritability, reduced working ability, and bleeding gums. What vitamin deficiency is the most likely cause of this condition?
a. Folic acid
b. Retinol
c. Thiamine
*d. Ascorbic acid
e. Riboflavin
76. A 25-year-old young man complains of general weakness, rapid fatigability, irritability, reduced working ability, and bleeding gums. What vitamin deficiency is the most likely cause of this condition?
a. Thiamine
*b. Ascorbic acid
c. Retinol
d. Folic acid
e. Riboflavin
77. A 26-year-old man presents with anemia against the background of chronic gastritis with intrinsic Castle factor deficiency. What type of anemia is characteristic of such cases?
a. Hypoplastic
b. Iron-deficiency
c. Thalassemia
*d. B_12 and folate deficiency
e. Chronic posthemorrhagic
78. A 26-year-old man presents with anemia against the background of chronic gastritis with intrinsic Castle factor deficiency. What type of anemia is characteristic of such cases?
a. Thalassemia
*b. B_12 and folate deficiency
c. Iron-deficiency
d. Hypoplastic
e. Chronic posthemorrhagic
79. A 26-year-old man presents with anemia against the background of chronic gastritis with intrinsic Castle factor deficiency. What type of anemia is characteristic of such cases?
a. Thalassemia
b. Iron-deficiency
*c. B_12 and folate deficiency
d. Hypoplastic
e. Chronic posthemorrhagic
80. A 26-year-old woman presents with skin rashes and itching after eating citrus fruits. Prescribe her a drug that is an H1-histamine receptor antagonist:
*a. Dimedrol (Diphenhydramine)
b. Paracetamol
c. Menadione (Vicasolum)
d. Analgin (Metamizole)
e. Acetylsalicylic acid
81. A 26-year-old woman presents with skin rashes and itching after eating citrus fruits. Prescribe her a drug that is an H1-histamine receptor antagonist:
a. Menadione (Vicasolum)
b. Analgin (Metamizole)
c. Acetylsalicylic acid
d. Paracetamol
*e. Dimedrol (Diphenhydramine)
82. A 26-year-old woman presents with skin rashes and itching after eating citrus fruits. Prescribe her a drug that is an H1-histamine receptor antagonist:
a. Menadione (Vicasolum)
b. Paracetamol
c. Analgin (Metamizole)
*d. Dimedrol (Diphenhydramine)
e. Acetylsalicylic acid
83. A 26-year-old woman was found to have a tumor of the alveolar process. The tumor manifests as a dense node with clear margins. Histological examination shows homogeneous mononuclear small oval cells mixed with multinucleated giant cells; occasionally bone trabeculae form among the cells. Make the diagnosis:
a. Ameloblastoma
*b. Giant-cell tumor of the bone
c. Primordial cyst
d. Fibromatous epulis
e. Eosinophilic granuloma
84. A 26-year-old woman was found to have a tumor of the alveolar process. The tumor manifests as a dense node with clear margins. Histological examination shows homogeneous mononuclear small oval cells mixed with multinucleated giant cells; occasionally bone trabeculae form among the cells. Make the diagnosis:
a. Ameloblastoma
b. Primordial cyst
c. Fibromatous epulis
*d. Giant-cell tumor of the bone
e. Eosinophilic granuloma
85. A 26-year-old woman was found to have a tumor of the alveolar process. The tumor manifests as a dense node with clear margins. Histological examination shows homogeneous mononuclear small oval cells mixed with multinucleated giant cells; occasionally bone trabeculae form among the cells. Make the diagnosis:
a. Eosinophilic granuloma
b. Fibromatous epulis
*c. Giant-cell tumor of the bone
d. Ameloblastoma
e. Primordial cyst
86. A 27-year-old man came to a doctor. Examination detects enlarged hands, feet, and lower jaw, deformed joints (kiphosis), and hormonal disorders (impotence and testicular atrophy). What gland is dysfunctional in this patient, as indicated by these signs?
*a. Anterior pituitary gland
b. Adrenal glands
c. Pineal gland
d. Parathyroid glands
e. Thyroid gland
87. A 27-year-old man came to a doctor. Examination detects enlarged hands, feet, and lower jaw, deformed joints (kiphosis), and hormonal disorders (impotence and testicular atrophy). What gland is dysfunctional in this patient, as indicated by these signs?
a. Adrenal glands
b. Pineal gland
*c. Anterior pituitary gland
d. Thyroid gland
e. Parathyroid glands
88. A 27-year-old man came to a doctor. Examination detects enlarged hands, feet, and lower jaw, deformed joints (kiphosis), and hormonal disorders (impotence and testicular atrophy). What gland is dysfunctional in this patient, as indicated by these signs?
a. Pineal gland
b. Thyroid gland
c. Adrenal glands
d. Parathyroid glands
*e. Anterior pituitary gland
89. A 27-year-old patient with neck wound has lost over 30% of blood volume. The patient is in severe condition: blood pressure - 60/40 mm Hg, heart rate - 140/min., respirations - 30/min., conscious. Characterize the patient's condition:
*a. Hypovolemic shock
b. Arterial hypertension
c. Collapse
d. Coma
e. Cardiogenic shock
90. A 27-year-old patient with neck wound has lost over 30% of blood volume. The patient is in severe condition: blood pressure - 60/40 mm Hg, heart rate - 140/min., respirations - 30/min., conscious. Characterize the patient's condition:
*a. Hypovolemic shock
b. Coma
c. Cardiogenic shock
d. Arterial hypertension
e. Collapse
91. A 27-year-old patient with neck wound has lost over 30% of blood volume. The patient is in severe condition: blood pressure - 60/40 mm Hg, heart rate - 140/min., respirations - 30/min., conscious. Characterize the patient's condition:
a. Arterial hypertension
b. Coma
c. Cardiogenic shock
*d. Hypovolemic shock
e. Collapse
92. A 28-year-old patient complains of frequent gingival hemorrhages. Blood test revealed the clotting factor II (prothrombin) deficiency. What phase of blood coagulation is impaired in this patient?
a. -
*b. Thrombin generation
c. Fibrinolysis
d. Vascular-platelet haemostasis
e. Clot retraction
93. A 28-year-old patient complains of frequent gingival hemorrhages. Blood test revealed the clotting factor II (prothrombin) deficiency. What phase of blood coagulation is impaired in this patient?
a. Fibrinolysis
*b. Thrombin generation
c. Clot retraction
d. -
e. Vascular-platelet haemostasis
94. A 28-year-old patient complains of frequent gingival hemorrhages. Blood test revealed the clotting factor II (prothrombin) deficiency. What phase of blood coagulation is impaired in this patient?
a. Vascular-platelet haemostasis
*b. Thrombin generation
c. Clot retraction
d. -
e. Fibrinolysis
95. A 28-year-old patient presented with elevated blood pressure, hematuria, and facial edemas. Despite the treatment, the signs of renal failure were exacerbating. 6 months later the patient died of uremia. Microscopy of the kidneys shows proliferation of nephrothelium in the glomerular capsules and proliferation of podocytes that contributes to crescent formation. Sclerosis and hyalinosis of the glomeruli is observed. Make the diagnosis:
a. Acute glomerulonephritis
*b. Subacute glomerulonephritis
c. Acute pyelonephritis
d. Nephrotic syndrome
e. Chronic glomerulonephritis
96. A 28-year-old patient presented with elevated blood pressure, hematuria, and facial edemas. Despite the treatment, the signs of renal failure were exacerbating. 6 months later the patient died of uremia. Microscopy of the kidneys shows proliferation of nephrothelium in the glomerular capsules and proliferation of podocytes that contributes to crescent formation. Sclerosis and hyalinosis of the glomeruli is observed. Make the diagnosis:
a. Acute glomerulonephritis
*b. Subacute glomerulonephritis
c. Nephrotic syndrome
d. Chronic glomerulonephritis
e. Acute pyelonephritis
97. A 28-year-old patient presented with elevated blood pressure, hematuria, and facial edemas. Despite the treatment, the signs of renal failure were exacerbating. 6 months later the patient died of uremia. Microscopy of the kidneys shows proliferation of nephrothelium in the glomerular capsules and proliferation of podocytes that contributes to crescent formation. Sclerosis and hyalinosis of the glomeruli is observed. Make the diagnosis:
a. Acute glomerulonephritis
b. Nephrotic syndrome
*c. Subacute glomerulonephritis
d. Chronic glomerulonephritis
e. Acute pyelonephritis
98. A 3-year-old child presents with facial deformation that was gradually developing over the course of 6 months and manifests as symmetrical enlargement of both mandibular angles. Microscopy shows the space between the bone trabeculae to be filled with connective tissue that contains numerous blood vessels and smaller primitive bone trabeculae. What disease is the most likely in this case?
*a. Cherubism
b. Fibroma
c. Eosinophilic granuloma
d. Osteosarcoma
e. Giant-cell tumor of the bone
99. A 3-year-old child presents with facial deformation that was gradually developing over the course of 6 months and manifests as symmetrical enlargement of both mandibular angles. Microscopy shows the space between the bone trabeculae to be filled with connective tissue that contains numerous blood vessels and smaller primitive bone trabeculae. What disease is the most likely in this case?
a. Eosinophilic granuloma
b. Giant-cell tumor of the bone
c. Fibroma
*d. Cherubism
e. Osteosarcoma
100. A 3-year-old child presents with facial deformation that was gradually developing over the course of 6 months and manifests as symmetrical enlargement of both mandibular angles. Microscopy shows the space between the bone trabeculae to be filled with connective tissue that contains numerous blood vessels and smaller primitive bone trabeculae. What disease is the most likely in this case?
a. Eosinophilic granuloma
b. Osteosarcoma
*c. Cherubism
d. Fibroma
e. Giant-cell tumor of the bone
101. A 3-year-old child was given strawberries. Soon after that, rashes appeared on the child's skin. What changes will be detected in the child's leukogram in this case?
a. Lymphocytosis
*b. Eosinophilia
c. Neutrophilic leukocytosis
d. Lymphocytopenia
e. Monocytosis
102. A 3-year-old child was given strawberries. Soon after that, rashes appeared on the child's skin. What changes will be detected in the child's leukogram in this case?
a. Monocytosis
b. Lymphocytosis
*c. Eosinophilia
d. Lymphocytopenia
e. Neutrophilic leukocytosis
103. A 3-year-old child was given strawberries. Soon after that, rashes appeared on the child's skin. What changes will be detected in the child's leukogram in this case?
a. Neutrophilic leukocytosis
b. Monocytosis
*c. Eosinophilia
d. Lymphocytosis
e. Lymphocytopenia
104. A 3-year-old child was hospitalized with signs of stomatitis, gingivitis, and dermatitis on the bare areas of skin. Examination determined a hereditary disorder of neutral amino acid transport in the intestine. What vitamin is deficient in this patient, causing such signs?
a. Biotin
b. Pantothenic acid
c. Cobalamin
*d. Niacin
e. Vitamin A
105. A 3-year-old child was hospitalized with signs of stomatitis, gingivitis, and dermatitis on the bare areas of skin. Examination determined a hereditary disorder of neutral amino acid transport in the intestine. What vitamin is deficient in this patient, causing such signs?
a. Pantothenic acid
b. Cobalamin
c. Biotin
*d. Niacin
e. Vitamin A
106. A 3-year-old girl has rubella. Her 10-year-old sister was not infected, despite both girls constantly remaining in contact. The pediatrician determined that the elder girl had rubella 5 years ago. What type of immunity does the elder sister have?
a. Artificial active
*b. Natural active
c. Natural passive
d. Innate
e. Artificial passive
107. A 3-year-old girl has rubella. Her 10-year-old sister was not infected, despite both girls constantly remaining in contact. The pediatrician determined that the elder girl had rubella 5 years ago. What type of immunity does the elder sister have?
a. Natural passive
*b. Natural active
c. Innate
d. Artificial passive
e. Artificial active
108. A 3-year-old girl has rubella. Her 10-year-old sister was not infected, despite both girls constantly remaining in contact. The pediatrician determined that the elder girl had rubella 5 years ago. What type of immunity does the elder sister have?
a. Natural passive
b. Innate
c. Artificial active
d. Artificial passive
*e. Natural active
109. A 30-year-old breastfeeding woman keeps to the diet that daily provides her with 1000 mg of calcium, 1300 mg of phosphorus, and 20 mg of iron. How should the daily dosages of minerals in this diet be adjusted?
*a. Increase phosphorus intake
b. Decrease iron intake
c. Increase calcium intake
d. Decrease fluorine intake
e. Increase iron intake
110. A 30-year-old breastfeeding woman keeps to the diet that daily provides her with 1000 mg of calcium, 1300 mg of phosphorus, and 20 mg of iron. How should the daily dosages of minerals in this diet be adjusted?
*a. Increase phosphorus intake
b. Decrease iron intake
c. Increase iron intake
d. Decrease fluorine intake
e. Increase calcium intake
111. A 30-year-old breastfeeding woman keeps to the diet that daily provides her with 1000 mg of calcium, 1300 mg of phosphorus, and 20 mg of iron. How should the daily dosages of minerals in this diet be adjusted?
a. Increase iron intake
b. Decrease fluorine intake
c. Decrease iron intake
d. Increase calcium intake
*e. Increase phosphorus intake
112. A 30-year-old patient has been diagnosed with a tumor of the body of the mandible. The tumor appeared several months ago. Macroscopically, the tumor is represented by a dense whitish tissue that destroys the jaw bone. Microscopy of the removed tumor shows that its structure consists of a network of odontogenic epithelial strands with various types of branching. What type of tumor is it?
a. Acanthomatous ameloblastoma
*b. Plexiform ameloblastoma
c. Follicular ameloblastoma
d. Granular cell ameloblastoma
e. Basal cell ameloblastoma
113. A 30-year-old patient has been diagnosed with a tumor of the body of the mandible. The tumor appeared several months ago. Macroscopically, the tumor is represented by a dense whitish tissue that destroys the jaw bone. Microscopy of the removed tumor shows that its structure consists of a network of odontogenic epithelial strands with various types of branching. What type of tumor is it?
a. Basal cell ameloblastoma
b. Granular cell ameloblastoma
c. Follicular ameloblastoma
d. Acanthomatous ameloblastoma
*e. Plexiform ameloblastoma
114. A 30-year-old patient has been diagnosed with a tumor of the body of the mandible. The tumor appeared several months ago. Macroscopically, the tumor is represented by a dense whitish tissue that destroys the jaw bone. Microscopy of the removed tumor shows that its structure consists of a network of odontogenic epithelial strands with various types of branching. What type of tumor is it?
a. Follicular ameloblastoma
*b. Plexiform ameloblastoma
c. Acanthomatous ameloblastoma
d. Granular cell ameloblastoma
e. Basal cell ameloblastoma
115. A 30-year-old patient has markedly positive Wassermann reaction (++++). What infectious disease can be diagnosed, using the Wassermann reaction?
*a. Syphilis
b. Poliomyelitis
c. Influenza
d. Brucellosis
e. Tuberculosis
116. A 30-year-old patient has markedly positive Wassermann reaction (++++). What infectious disease can be diagnosed, using the Wassermann reaction?
a. Influenza
*b. Syphilis
c. Poliomyelitis
d. Tuberculosis
e. Brucellosis
117. A 30-year-old patient has markedly positive Wassermann reaction (++++). What infectious disease can be diagnosed, using the Wassermann reaction?
a. Poliomyelitis
b. Tuberculosis
c. Influenza
d. Brucellosis
*e. Syphilis
118. A 30-year-old patient hospitalized with diagnosis of acute glomerulonephritis presents with proteinuria. What disturbance has caused this phenomenon?
*a. Increased permeability of glomerular membrane
b. Increased hydrostatic pressure on the capillary walls
c. Delayed excretion of nitrogen metabolism products
d. Decreased oncotic blood pressure
e. Decreased number of functional nephrons
119. A 30-year-old patient hospitalized with diagnosis of acute glomerulonephritis presents with proteinuria. What disturbance has caused this phenomenon?
a. Decreased number of functional nephrons
b. Delayed excretion of nitrogen metabolism products
*c. Increased permeability of glomerular membrane
d. Increased hydrostatic pressure on the capillary walls
e. Decreased oncotic blood pressure
120. A 30-year-old patient hospitalized with diagnosis of acute glomerulonephritis presents with proteinuria. What disturbance has caused this phenomenon?
a. Decreased number of functional nephrons
b. Increased hydrostatic pressure on the capillary walls
c. Delayed excretion of nitrogen metabolism products
*d. Increased permeability of glomerular membrane
e. Decreased oncotic blood pressure
121. A 30-year-old woman complains of intense thirst and dryness of the mouth that developed after a severe emotional shock. Laboratory analysis revealed increase of the patient's blood sugar level up to 10 mmol/L. What endocrine gland is affected in the patient?
*a. Pancreas
b. Gonads
c. Adrenal glands
d. Pineal gland
e. Thyroid gland
122. A 30-year-old woman complains of intense thirst and dryness of the mouth that developed after a severe emotional shock. Laboratory analysis revealed increase of the patient's blood sugar level up to 10 mmol/L. What endocrine gland is affected in the patient?
*a. Pancreas
b. Gonads
c. Pineal gland
d. Thyroid gland
e. Adrenal glands
123. A 30-year-old woman complains of intense thirst and dryness of the mouth that developed after a severe emotional shock. Laboratory analysis revealed increase of the patient's blood sugar level up to 10 mmol/L. What endocrine gland is affected in the patient?
*a. Pancreas
b. Pineal gland
c. Adrenal glands
d. Thyroid gland
e. Gonads
124. A 30-year-old woman has developed signs of virilism (body hair growth, balding temples, disturbed menstrual cycle). This condition can be caused by hyperproduction of the following hormone:
*a. Testosterone
b. Relaxin
c. Oxytocin
d. Estriol
e. Prolactin
125. A 30-year-old woman has developed signs of virilism (body hair growth, balding temples, disturbed menstrual cycle). This condition can be caused by hyperproduction of the following hormone:
a. Oxytocin
b. Estriol
c. Prolactin
*d. Testosterone
e. Relaxin
126. A 30-year-old woman has developed signs of virilism (body hair growth, balding temples, disturbed menstrual cycle). This condition can be caused by hyperproduction of the following hormone:
a. Relaxin
b. Prolactin
c. Estriol
*d. Testosterone
e. Oxytocin
127. A 32-year-old woman underwent removal of a brown fungiform gingival neoplasm. Microscopically, it consists of connective tissue with numerous sinusoidal vessels, large multinucleated cells, and small mononuclear cells. There are small hemorrhages and hemosiderin deposits, as well. What type of neoplasm is it?
*a. Giant-cell epulis
b. Angiomatous epulis
c. Hypertrophic gingivitis
d. Gingival fibromatosis
e. Fibromatous epulis
128. A 32-year-old woman underwent removal of a brown fungiform gingival neoplasm. Microscopically, it consists of connective tissue with numerous sinusoidal vessels, large multinucleated cells, and small mononuclear cells. There are small hemorrhages and hemosiderin deposits, as well. What type of neoplasm is it?
a. Gingival fibromatosis
b. Angiomatous epulis
c. Fibromatous epulis
d. Hypertrophic gingivitis
*e. Giant-cell epulis
129. A 32-year-old woman underwent removal of a brown fungiform gingival neoplasm. Microscopically, it consists of connective tissue with numerous sinusoidal vessels, large multinucleated cells, and small mononuclear cells. There are small hemorrhages and hemosiderin deposits, as well. What type of neoplasm is it?
a. Hypertrophic gingivitis
*b. Giant-cell epulis
c. Angiomatous epulis
d. Gingival fibromatosis
e. Fibromatous epulis
130. A 32-year-old woman with asymptomatic progression of the disease for the second time gave birth to a stillborn baby with marked microcephaly. What disease can be suspected in this case?
*a. Toxoplasmosis
b. Listeriosis
c. Brucellosis
d. Histoplasmosis
e. Syphilis
131. A 32-year-old woman with asymptomatic progression of the disease for the second time gave birth to a stillborn baby with marked microcephaly. What disease can be suspected in this case?
a. Brucellosis
b. Histoplasmosis
*c. Toxoplasmosis
d. Listeriosis
e. Syphilis
132. A 32-year-old woman with asymptomatic progression of the disease for the second time gave birth to a stillborn baby with marked microcephaly. What disease can be suspected in this case?
a. Listeriosis
*b. Toxoplasmosis
c. Histoplasmosis
d. Syphilis
e. Brucellosis
133. A 34-year-old woman has a gastric ulcer. To describe the location of the ulcer, the doctor must know, into what parts the stomach can be divided:
*a. Body and fundus of the stomach, pyloric stomach and cardiac stomach
b. Fundus of the stomach, greater and lesser curvatures of stomach, cardiac stomach
c. Fundus and fornix of the stomach, pyloric stomach, pyloric antrum, cardiac stomach
d. Anterior and posterior stomach walls, pyloric stomach and cardiac stomach
e. Body and fundus of the stomach, greater and lesser curvatures of stomach
134. A 34-year-old woman has a gastric ulcer. To describe the location of the ulcer, the doctor must know, into what parts the stomach can be divided:
a. Anterior and posterior stomach walls, pyloric stomach and cardiac stomach
b. Body and fundus of the stomach, greater and lesser curvatures of stomach
*c. Body and fundus of the stomach, pyloric stomach and cardiac stomach
d. Fundus of the stomach, greater and lesser curvatures of stomach, cardiac stomach
e. Fundus and fornix of the stomach, pyloric stomach, pyloric antrum, cardiac stomach
135. A 34-year-old woman has a gastric ulcer. To describe the location of the ulcer, the doctor must know, into what parts the stomach can be divided:
a. Fundus and fornix of the stomach, pyloric stomach, pyloric antrum, cardiac stomach
b. Fundus of the stomach, greater and lesser curvatures of stomach, cardiac stomach
c. Body and fundus of the stomach, greater and lesser curvatures of stomach
*d. Body and fundus of the stomach, pyloric stomach and cardiac stomach
e. Anterior and posterior stomach walls, pyloric stomach and cardiac stomach
136. A 35-year-old man came to a hospital with complaints of pain in the right lower jaw, fever, chills, and a swelling. Examination detects detachment of the periosteum with accumulation of inflammatory exudate between the periosteum and the bone, perifocal edema of soft tissues, and partial liquefaction of the periosteum. What diagnosis can be suspected in this case?
*a. Purulent periostitis
b. -
c. Local parodontitis
d. Parodontosis
e. Granulating periodontitis
137. A 35-year-old man came to a hospital with complaints of pain in the right lower jaw, fever, chills, and a swelling. Examination detects detachment of the periosteum with accumulation of inflammatory exudate between the periosteum and the bone, perifocal edema of soft tissues, and partial liquefaction of the periosteum. What diagnosis can be suspected in this case?
a. Granulating periodontitis
b. Local parodontitis
c. Parodontosis
d. -
*e. Purulent periostitis
138. A 35-year-old man came to a hospital with complaints of pain in the right lower jaw, fever, chills, and a swelling. Examination detects detachment of the periosteum with accumulation of inflammatory exudate between the periosteum and the bone, perifocal edema of soft tissues, and partial liquefaction of the periosteum. What diagnosis can be suspected in this case?
a. Parodontosis
b. -
*c. Purulent periostitis
d. Granulating periodontitis
e. Local parodontitis
139. A 35-year-old man had an acute onset of the disease. He developed temperature of 39^oC, rhinitis, cough, and lacrimation. Examination shows swollen and hyperemic nasopharyngeal mucosa with profuse mucus discharge. What type of inflammation developed in the nasopharynx?
*a. Catarrhal inflammation
b. Suppurative inflammation
c. Hemorrhagic inflammation
d. Serous inflammation
e. Fibrinous inflammation
140. A 35-year-old man had an acute onset of the disease. He developed temperature of 39^oC, rhinitis, cough, and lacrimation. Examination shows swollen and hyperemic nasopharyngeal mucosa with profuse mucus discharge. What type of inflammation developed in the nasopharynx?
a. Fibrinous inflammation
b. Suppurative inflammation
c. Serous inflammation
*d. Catarrhal inflammation
e. Hemorrhagic inflammation
141. A 35-year-old man had an acute onset of the disease. He developed temperature of 39^oC, rhinitis, cough, and lacrimation. Examination shows swollen and hyperemic nasopharyngeal mucosa with profuse mucus discharge. What type of inflammation developed in the nasopharynx?
a. Serous inflammation
*b. Catarrhal inflammation
c. Fibrinous inflammation
d. Hemorrhagic inflammation
e. Suppurative inflammation
142. A 35-year-old man had been suffering from bronchial asthma for a long time. Eventually he developed a status asthmaticus that became lethal. Examination of section materials shows a bronchiolar spasm in the lungs. The bronchiolar walls show signs of cellular infiltration with predominance of eosinophilic leukocytes and lymphocytes, labrocytes with signs of degranulation are observed. What mechanism of hypersensitivity is the cause of these changes?
a. -
b. Antibody-dependent
*c. Reaginic reaction
d. Immune complex
e. Cell-mediated cytotoxicity
143. A 35-year-old man had been suffering from bronchial asthma for a long time. Eventually he developed a status asthmaticus that became lethal. Examination of section materials shows a bronchiolar spasm in the lungs. The bronchiolar walls show signs of cellular infiltration with predominance of eosinophilic leukocytes and lymphocytes, labrocytes with signs of degranulation are observed. What mechanism of hypersensitivity is the cause of these changes?
a. Cell-mediated cytotoxicity
b. -
c. Immune complex
*d. Reaginic reaction
e. Antibody-dependent
144. A 35-year-old man had been suffering from bronchial asthma for a long time. Eventually he developed a status asthmaticus that became lethal. Examination of section materials shows a bronchiolar spasm in the lungs. The bronchiolar walls show signs of cellular infiltration with predominance of eosinophilic leukocytes and lymphocytes, labrocytes with signs of degranulation are observed. What mechanism of hypersensitivity is the cause of these changes?
a. Cell-mediated cytotoxicity
b. Immune complex
c. Antibody-dependent
*d. Reaginic reaction
e. -
145. A 35-year-old patient, who complains of heartburn and sharp pain in the epigastrium on an empty stomach, was prescribed an H_2-histamine blocker. What drug is it?
*a. Ranitidine
b. Vicaline
c. Atropine
d. Almagel
e. Methacin (metocinium iodide)
146. A 35-year-old patient, who complains of heartburn and sharp pain in the epigastrium on an empty stomach, was prescribed an H_2-histamine blocker. What drug is it?
a. Atropine
b. Methacin (metocinium iodide)
c. Almagel
d. Vicaline
*e. Ranitidine
147. A 35-year-old patient, who complains of heartburn and sharp pain in the epigastrium on an empty stomach, was prescribed an H_2-histamine blocker. What drug is it?
a. Methacin (metocinium iodide)
b. Almagel
c. Atropine
d. Vicaline
*e. Ranitidine
148. A 35-year-old woman is diagnosed with faucial diphtheria. The patient died with signs of acute heart failure. On autopsy: heart cavities are enlarged in the diameter, heart muscle is dull, flaccid, striped on section, with yellowish areas under the endocardium. What type of degeneration was detected in cardiac hystiocytes?
*a. Fatty
b. Hydropic
c. Hyaline droplet
d. Carbohydrate
e. Ballooning
149. A 35-year-old woman is diagnosed with faucial diphtheria. The patient died with signs of acute heart failure. On autopsy: heart cavities are enlarged in the diameter, heart muscle is dull, flaccid, striped on section, with yellowish areas under the endocardium. What type of degeneration was detected in cardiac hystiocytes?
a. Hydropic
b. Ballooning
*c. Fatty
d. Hyaline droplet
e. Carbohydrate
150. A 35-year-old woman is diagnosed with faucial diphtheria. The patient died with signs of acute heart failure. On autopsy: heart cavities are enlarged in the diameter, heart muscle is dull, flaccid, striped on section, with yellowish areas under the endocardium. What type of degeneration was detected in cardiac hystiocytes?
a. Hydropic
b. Carbohydrate
*c. Fatty
d. Ballooning
e. Hyaline droplet
151. A 36-year-old man traveled to the mountains for a vacation (altitude of 2000 meters above the sea level). He developed increased respiration rate, tachycardia, and slight dizziness. Two days later these signs disappeared. This process is called:
a. Proliferation
b. Inhibition
*c. Adaptation
d. Compensation
e. Regeneration
152. A 36-year-old man traveled to the mountains for a vacation (altitude of 2000 meters above the sea level). He developed increased respiration rate, tachycardia, and slight dizziness. Two days later these signs disappeared. This process is called:
a. Regeneration
*b. Adaptation
c. Proliferation
d. Inhibition
e. Compensation
153. A 36-year-old man traveled to the mountains for a vacation (altitude of 2000 meters above the sea level). He developed increased respiration rate, tachycardia, and slight dizziness. Two days later these signs disappeared. This process is called:
a. Regeneration
b. Compensation
c. Proliferation
*d. Adaptation
e. Inhibition
154. A 36-year-old man was hospitalized into the infectious diseases hospital with profuse diarrhea, signs of exicosis, and low body temperature. He died of uremia. Autopsy revealed a colorless liquid resembling rice water in the lumen of the small intestine; mucosa is edematous. Microscopy of the small intestine shows plethoric vessels, focal hemorrhages, enterocyte desquamation, hypersecretion of goblet cells, and lympholeukocytic infiltration of mucosal stroma. Make the diagnosis:
*a. Cholera
b. Salmonellosis
c. Crohn disease
d. Dysentery
e. Typhoid fever
155. A 36-year-old man was hospitalized into the infectious diseases hospital with profuse diarrhea, signs of exicosis, and low body temperature. He died of uremia. Autopsy revealed a colorless liquid resembling rice water in the lumen of the small intestine; mucosa is edematous. Microscopy of the small intestine shows plethoric vessels, focal hemorrhages, enterocyte desquamation, hypersecretion of goblet cells, and lympholeukocytic infiltration of mucosal stroma. Make the diagnosis:
a. Dysentery
b. Crohn disease
c. Salmonellosis
d. Typhoid fever
*e. Cholera
156. A 36-year-old man was hospitalized into the infectious diseases hospital with profuse diarrhea, signs of exicosis, and low body temperature. He died of uremia. Autopsy revealed a colorless liquid resembling rice water in the lumen of the small intestine; mucosa is edematous. Microscopy of the small intestine shows plethoric vessels, focal hemorrhages, enterocyte desquamation, hypersecretion of goblet cells, and lympholeukocytic infiltration of mucosal stroma. Make the diagnosis:
a. Typhoid fever
b. Salmonellosis
c. Dysentery
*d. Cholera
e. Crohn disease
157. A 36-year-old woman came to a dentist with complaints of facial edema localized under her right eye. After examination, the dentist diagnosed her with phlegmon of the infraorbital region. What teeth often become the source of infection that spreads into this region?
*a. Upper canine and first premolar
b. Upper central incisor
c. Upper lateral and central incisors
d. Upper first and second molars
e. Second premolar and first molar
158. A 36-year-old woman came to a dentist with complaints of facial edema localized under her right eye. After examination, the dentist diagnosed her with phlegmon of the infraorbital region. What teeth often become the source of infection that spreads into this region?
a. Upper central incisor
b. Upper lateral and central incisors
c. Second premolar and first molar
d. Upper first and second molars
*e. Upper canine and first premolar
159. A 36-year-old woman came to a dentist with complaints of facial edema localized under her right eye. After examination, the dentist diagnosed her with phlegmon of the infraorbital region. What teeth often become the source of infection that spreads into this region?
a. Upper central incisor
b. Upper lateral and central incisors
c. Upper first and second molars
d. Second premolar and first molar
*e. Upper canine and first premolar
160. A 37-year-old patient was diagnosed with essential hypertension and prescribed lisinopril. What is the mechanism of action of this drug?
*a. Binds angiotensin-converting enzyme and blocks the conversion of angiotensin I into angiotensin II
b. Blocks calcium channels
c. Blocks angiotensin receptors in blood vessels
d. Stimulates imidazoline receptors
e. Blocks potassium channels
161. A 37-year-old patient was diagnosed with essential hypertension and prescribed lisinopril. What is the mechanism of action of this drug?
*a. Binds angiotensin-converting enzyme and blocks the conversion of angiotensin I into angiotensin II
b. Blocks potassium channels
c. Blocks calcium channels
d. Stimulates imidazoline receptors
e. Blocks angiotensin receptors in blood vessels
162. A 37-year-old patient was diagnosed with essential hypertension and prescribed lisinopril. What is the mechanism of action of this drug?
a. Blocks angiotensin receptors in blood vessels
b. Stimulates imidazoline receptors
c. Blocks calcium channels
*d. Binds angiotensin-converting enzyme and blocks the conversion of angiotensin I into angiotensin II
e. Blocks potassium channels
163. A 37-year-old woman presents with fructosemia and fructosuria. Her blood glucose is 2.1 mmol/L. She is diagnosed with fructose intolerance. What congenital enzyme deficiency is the molecular basis of this disease?
a. Hexokinase
b. Phosphoglucomutase
c. Triose-phosphate isomerase
d. Phosphofructokinase
*e. Fructose 1-phosphate aldolase
164. A 37-year-old woman presents with fructosemia and fructosuria. Her blood glucose is 2.1 mmol/L. She is diagnosed with fructose intolerance. What congenital enzyme deficiency is the molecular basis of this disease?
a. Triose-phosphate isomerase
*b. Fructose 1-phosphate aldolase
c. Phosphoglucomutase
d. Hexokinase
e. Phosphofructokinase
165. A 37-year-old woman presents with fructosemia and fructosuria. Her blood glucose is 2.1 mmol/L. She is diagnosed with fructose intolerance. What congenital enzyme deficiency is the molecular basis of this disease?
a. Triose-phosphate isomerase
b. Phosphoglucomutase
*c. Fructose 1-phosphate aldolase
d. Hexokinase
e. Phosphofructokinase
166. A 38-year-old man with chronic alcoholism died of progressve heart failure. An autopsy shows lobar pleuropneumonia in the lower lobe of the right lung. Histology shows a fibrinous exudate and segmented leukocytes in the alveoli. Determine the stage of croupous pneumonia:
a. Red hepatization
*b. Gray hepatization
c. Influx
d. -
e. Resolution
167. A 38-year-old man with chronic alcoholism died of progressve heart failure. An autopsy shows lobar pleuropneumonia in the lower lobe of the right lung. Histology shows a fibrinous exudate and segmented leukocytes in the alveoli. Determine the stage of croupous pneumonia:
a. Resolution
b. -
c. Influx
*d. Gray hepatization
e. Red hepatization
168. A 38-year-old man with chronic alcoholism died of progressve heart failure. An autopsy shows lobar pleuropneumonia in the lower lobe of the right lung. Histology shows a fibrinous exudate and segmented leukocytes in the alveoli. Determine the stage of croupous pneumonia:
a. Resolution
b. -
c. Red hepatization
d. Influx
*e. Gray hepatization
169. A 38-year-old patient complains of a constant joint pain. Laboratory studies detect increased levels of proline and oxyproline in the patient's urine, which indicates problems with the metabolism of the following compound:
a. Chondroitin sulfate
*b. Collagen
c. Heparin
d. Elastin
e. Hyaluronic acid
170. A 38-year-old patient complains of a constant joint pain. Laboratory studies detect increased levels of proline and oxyproline in the patient's urine, which indicates problems with the metabolism of the following compound:
a. Heparin
b. Chondroitin sulfate
*c. Collagen
d. Hyaluronic acid
e. Elastin
171. A 38-year-old patient complains of a constant joint pain. Laboratory studies detect increased levels of proline and oxyproline in the patient's urine, which indicates problems with the metabolism of the following compound:
a. Hyaluronic acid
*b. Collagen
c. Heparin
d. Elastin
e. Chondroitin sulfate
172. A 38-year-old patient has been hospitalized with alcohol-induced psychosis accompanied by marked psychomotor agitation. What neuroleptic must be prescribed in this case?
*a. Aminazine (Chlorpromazine)
b. Galantamine hydrobromide
c. Diphenin (Phenytoin)
d. Sodium bromide
e. Valerian extract
173. A 38-year-old patient has been hospitalized with alcohol-induced psychosis accompanied by marked psychomotor agitation. What neuroleptic must be prescribed in this case?
a. Diphenin (Phenytoin)
b. Sodium bromide
c. Galantamine hydrobromide
d. Valerian extract
*e. Aminazine (Chlorpromazine)
174. A 38-year-old patient has been hospitalized with alcohol-induced psychosis accompanied by marked psychomotor agitation. What neuroleptic must be prescribed in this case?
a. Valerian extract
*b. Aminazine (Chlorpromazine)
c. Diphenin (Phenytoin)
d. Sodium bromide
e. Galantamine hydrobromide
175. A 38-year-old woman developed an attack of bronchial asthma. What bronchial spasmolytic for emergency medical aid is a beta-2-adrenergic agonist?
a. Adrenaline
b. Atropine
c. Ipratropium bromide
*d. Salbutamol
e. Platyphyllin
176. A 38-year-old woman developed an attack of bronchial asthma. What bronchial spasmolytic for emergency medical aid is a beta-2-adrenergic agonist?
a. Atropine
*b. Salbutamol
c. Platyphyllin
d. Ipratropium bromide
e. Adrenaline
177. A 38-year-old woman developed an attack of bronchial asthma. What bronchial spasmolytic for emergency medical aid is a beta-2-adrenergic agonist?
a. Ipratropium bromide
b. Platyphyllin
c. Adrenaline
*d. Salbutamol
e. Atropine
178. A 4-year-old child has numerous carious cavities and yellow-colored teeth. It is known that during her pregnancy the child's mother was undergoing an antibiotic treatment. What medicine was likely being taken by the child's mother?
a. Cefazolin
*b. Doxycycline
c. Ampicillin
d. Streptomycin sulfate
e. Erythromycin
179. A 4-year-old child has numerous carious cavities and yellow-colored teeth. It is known that during her pregnancy the child's mother was undergoing an antibiotic treatment. What medicine was likely being taken by the child's mother?
a. Cefazolin
b. Ampicillin
c. Erythromycin
d. Streptomycin sulfate
*e. Doxycycline
180. A 4-year-old child has numerous carious cavities and yellow-colored teeth. It is known that during her pregnancy the child's mother was undergoing an antibiotic treatment. What medicine was likely being taken by the child's mother?
a. Streptomycin sulfate
*b. Doxycycline
c. Cefazolin
d. Erythromycin
e. Ampicillin
181. A 40-year-old man has returned home after his voyages along the coast of West Africa that lasted for many months. 15 days later he developed weakness, headache, elevated temperature, and fever. He was diagnosed with malaria. What laboratory methods of analysis can confirm this diagnosis?
a. Bacteriology, allergy testing
b. Serology, biologic method
*c. Microscopy, serology
d. Bacterioscopy, biologic method
e. Microscopy, microbial culture
182. A 40-year-old man has returned home after his voyages along the coast of West Africa that lasted for many months. 15 days later he developed weakness, headache, elevated temperature, and fever. He was diagnosed with malaria. What laboratory methods of analysis can confirm this diagnosis?
a. Bacterioscopy, biologic method
b. Serology, biologic method
*c. Microscopy, serology
d. Bacteriology, allergy testing
e. Microscopy, microbial culture
183. A 40-year-old man has returned home after his voyages along the coast of West Africa that lasted for many months. 15 days later he developed weakness, headache, elevated temperature, and fever. He was diagnosed with malaria. What laboratory methods of analysis can confirm this diagnosis?
a. Microscopy, microbial culture
b. Bacteriology, allergy testing
c. Bacterioscopy, biologic method
d. Serology, biologic method
*e. Microscopy, serology
184. A 40-year-old patient has been diagnosed with herpetic stomatitis. What antiviral drug should be prescribed in this case?
*a. Acyclovir
b. Oxacillin sodium
c. Para-aminosalicylic acid
d. Tinidazole
e. Phthalazol (Phthalylsulfathiazole)
185. A 40-year-old patient has been diagnosed with herpetic stomatitis. What antiviral drug should be prescribed in this case?
a. Para-aminosalicylic acid
b. Oxacillin sodium
c. Phthalazol (Phthalylsulfathiazole)
d. Tinidazole
*e. Acyclovir
186. A 40-year-old patient has been diagnosed with herpetic stomatitis. What antiviral drug should be prescribed in this case?
a. Tinidazole
b. Oxacillin sodium
*c. Acyclovir
d. Para-aminosalicylic acid
e. Phthalazol (Phthalylsulfathiazole)
187. A 40-year-old patient with a poisoning caused by the chlorophos (metrifonate) insecticide was hospitalized into the toxicology department. What drug that blocks peripheral muscarinic acetylcholine receptors would be most effective in treatment of such poisoning?
*a. Atropine sulfate
b. Scopolamine
c. Platyphylline
d. Benzohexonium (Hexamethonium)
e. Amizylum (Benactyzine)
188. A 40-year-old patient with a poisoning caused by the chlorophos (metrifonate) insecticide was hospitalized into the toxicology department. What drug that blocks peripheral muscarinic acetylcholine receptors would be most effective in treatment of such poisoning?
a. Benzohexonium (Hexamethonium)
b. Platyphylline
*c. Atropine sulfate
d. Amizylum (Benactyzine)
e. Scopolamine
189. A 40-year-old patient with a poisoning caused by the chlorophos (metrifonate) insecticide was hospitalized into the toxicology department. What drug that blocks peripheral muscarinic acetylcholine receptors would be most effective in treatment of such poisoning?
a. Scopolamine
b. Amizylum (Benactyzine)
c. Platyphylline
d. Benzohexonium (Hexamethonium)
*e. Atropine sulfate
190. A 40-year-old woman after installation of artificial crowns on her upper incisors eventually developed a brownish gingival enlargement on the vestibular surface. The enlargement covers the crowns and is 15 mm in diameter. Open biopsy results: under the stratified squamous epithelium of the gums there is a neoplasm consisting of connective tissue with numerous sinusoid vessels, oval mononuclear cells that form osteoid substance, and multinucleated giant cells that destroy the maxillary alveolar ridge. Make the diagnosis:
a. Angiomatous epulis
*b. Giant-cell epulis
c. Fibromatous epulis
d. Gingival fibromatosis
e. Eosinophilic granuloma
191. A 40-year-old woman after installation of artificial crowns on her upper incisors eventually developed a brownish gingival enlargement on the vestibular surface. The enlargement covers the crowns and is 15 mm in diameter. Open biopsy results: under the stratified squamous epithelium of the gums there is a neoplasm consisting of connective tissue with numerous sinusoid vessels, oval mononuclear cells that form osteoid substance, and multinucleated giant cells that destroy the maxillary alveolar ridge. Make the diagnosis:
a. Angiomatous epulis
b. Eosinophilic granuloma
c. Gingival fibromatosis
d. Fibromatous epulis
*e. Giant-cell epulis
192. A 40-year-old woman after installation of artificial crowns on her upper incisors eventually developed a brownish gingival enlargement on the vestibular surface. The enlargement covers the crowns and is 15 mm in diameter. Open biopsy results: under the stratified squamous epithelium of the gums there is a neoplasm consisting of connective tissue with numerous sinusoid vessels, oval mononuclear cells that form osteoid substance, and multinucleated giant cells that destroy the maxillary alveolar ridge. Make the diagnosis:
a. Gingival fibromatosis
b. Fibromatous epulis
*c. Giant-cell epulis
d. Angiomatous epulis
e. Eosinophilic granuloma
193. A 40-year-old woman is being treated at the therapeutics department. Her temperature chart shows cyclic fevers alternating with periods of temperature normalization that last for several days. What type of temperature profile is it?
*a. Febris recurrens
b. Febris remittens
c. Febris intermittent
d. Febris continua
e. -
194. A 40-year-old woman is being treated at the therapeutics department. Her temperature chart shows cyclic fevers alternating with periods of temperature normalization that last for several days. What type of temperature profile is it?
a. -
b. Febris continua
*c. Febris recurrens
d. Febris intermittent
e. Febris remittens
195. A 40-year-old woman is being treated at the therapeutics department. Her temperature chart shows cyclic fevers alternating with periods of temperature normalization that last for several days. What type of temperature profile is it?
a. Febris intermittent
b. -
*c. Febris recurrens
d. Febris remittens
e. Febris continua
196. A 40-year-old woman was diagnosed with bronchial asthma that manifests as periodic asthma attacks. What type of respiratory failure is observed in the woman during the asthma attack?
*a. Obstructive
b. Pulmonary restrictive
c. Dysregulatory
d. Hypoxemic
e. Extrapulmonary
197. A 40-year-old woman was diagnosed with bronchial asthma that manifests as periodic asthma attacks. What type of respiratory failure is observed in the woman during the asthma attack?
a. Hypoxemic
b. Dysregulatory
*c. Obstructive
d. Pulmonary restrictive
e. Extrapulmonary
198. A 40-year-old woman was diagnosed with bronchial asthma that manifests as periodic asthma attacks. What type of respiratory failure is observed in the woman during the asthma attack?
a. Pulmonary restrictive
b. Extrapulmonary
c. Hypoxemic
*d. Obstructive
e. Dysregulatory
199. A 42-year-old man fell ill one week after he had been preparing a fox pelt. The disease manifested as nervous excitement, hydrophobia, and convulsions. Autopsy of the man's body detected encephalitis with damage to the brain stem, walls of the third ventricle, and hippocampus. Signs of encephalitis included accumulation of lymphocytes and microglial cells around dead neurons and blood vessels. Eosinophilic inclusions (Babesh-Negri bodies) were detected in the hippocampal neurons. What disease was diagnosed in the deceased man?
*a. Rabies
b. Anthrax
c. Brucellosis
d. Tularemia
e. Plague
200. A 42-year-old man fell ill one week after he had been preparing a fox pelt. The disease manifested as nervous excitement, hydrophobia, and convulsions. Autopsy of the man's body detected encephalitis with damage to the brain stem, walls of the third ventricle, and hippocampus. Signs of encephalitis included accumulation of lymphocytes and microglial cells around dead neurons and blood vessels. Eosinophilic inclusions (Babesh-Negri bodies) were detected in the hippocampal neurons. What disease was diagnosed in the deceased man?
a. Anthrax
b. Plague
*c. Rabies
d. Tularemia
e. Brucellosis
201. A 42-year-old man fell ill one week after he had been preparing a fox pelt. The disease manifested as nervous excitement, hydrophobia, and convulsions. Autopsy of the man's body detected encephalitis with damage to the brain stem, walls of the third ventricle, and hippocampus. Signs of encephalitis included accumulation of lymphocytes and microglial cells around dead neurons and blood vessels. Eosinophilic inclusions (Babesh-Negri bodies) were detected in the hippocampal neurons. What disease was diagnosed in the deceased man?
a. Tularemia
b. Plague
c. Anthrax
d. Brucellosis
*e. Rabies
202. A 42-year-old man was examined. He has a slightly feminized stature, testicular atrophy, and sparse hair growth on his face and chest. His neutrophilic leukocytes contain drumstick-shaped sex chromatin. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Down syndrome
*b. Klinefelter syndrome
c. Trisomy X
d. Patau syndrome
e. Phenylketonuria
203. A 42-year-old man was examined. He has a slightly feminized stature, testicular atrophy, and sparse hair growth on his face and chest. His neutrophilic leukocytes contain drumstick-shaped sex chromatin. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Phenylketonuria
*b. Klinefelter syndrome
c. Patau syndrome
d. Trisomy X
e. Down syndrome
204. A 42-year-old man was examined. He has a slightly feminized stature, testicular atrophy, and sparse hair growth on his face and chest. His neutrophilic leukocytes contain drumstick-shaped sex chromatin. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Phenylketonuria
b. Down syndrome
c. Patau syndrome
*d. Klinefelter syndrome
e. Trisomy X
205. A 42-year-old man with an incised wound on the lower anterior surface of his shoulder came to the medical station. Objectively he presents with impaired forearm flexion. What muscles are likely to be damaged in this patient?
*a. M. brachialis, m. biceps brachii
b. M. biceps brachii, m. anconeus
c. M. deltoideus, m. biceps brachii
d. M. coracobrachialis, m. supraspinatus
e. M. deltoideus, m. infraspinatus
206. A 42-year-old man with an incised wound on the lower anterior surface of his shoulder came to the medical station. Objectively he presents with impaired forearm flexion. What muscles are likely to be damaged in this patient?
a. M. biceps brachii, m. anconeus
b. M. deltoideus, m. biceps brachii
c. M. deltoideus, m. infraspinatus
*d. M. brachialis, m. biceps brachii
e. M. coracobrachialis, m. supraspinatus
207. A 42-year-old man with an incised wound on the lower anterior surface of his shoulder came to the medical station. Objectively he presents with impaired forearm flexion. What muscles are likely to be damaged in this patient?
a. M. deltoideus, m. infraspinatus
b. M. deltoideus, m. biceps brachii
c. M. coracobrachialis, m. supraspinatus
d. M. biceps brachii, m. anconeus
*e. M. brachialis, m. biceps brachii
208. A 42-year-old man, a hunter, was preparing a fox pelt. One week later, he fell ill. The disease manifested as nervous excitement, hydrophobia, and seizures. Autopsy of the hunter's body revealed encephalitis with damage to the brainstem, walls of the third ventricle, and hippocampus. Encephalitis manifested as accumulation of lymphocytes and microglial cells around dead neurons and blood vessels. Eosinophilic inclusions (Babesh-Negri bodies) were detected in the hippocampal neurons. What disease can be diagnosed in the deceased?
a. Plague
*b. Rabies
c. Brucellosis
d. Anthrax
e. Tularemia
209. A 42-year-old man, a hunter, was preparing a fox pelt. One week later, he fell ill. The disease manifested as nervous excitement, hydrophobia, and seizures. Autopsy of the hunter's body revealed encephalitis with damage to the brainstem, walls of the third ventricle, and hippocampus. Encephalitis manifested as accumulation of lymphocytes and microglial cells around dead neurons and blood vessels. Eosinophilic inclusions (Babesh-Negri bodies) were detected in the hippocampal neurons. What disease can be diagnosed in the deceased?
a. Plague
b. Anthrax
c. Brucellosis
d. Tularemia
*e. Rabies
210. A 42-year-old man, a hunter, was preparing a fox pelt. One week later, he fell ill. The disease manifested as nervous excitement, hydrophobia, and seizures. Autopsy of the hunter's body revealed encephalitis with damage to the brainstem, walls of the third ventricle, and hippocampus. Encephalitis manifested as accumulation of lymphocytes and microglial cells around dead neurons and blood vessels. Eosinophilic inclusions (Babesh-Negri bodies) were detected in the hippocampal neurons. What disease can be diagnosed in the deceased?
a. Plague
b. Brucellosis
c. Tularemia
d. Anthrax
*e. Rabies
211. A 42-year-old woman, who has been keeping to a vegetarian diet for a long period of time, consulted a doctor. Examination revealed negative nitrogen balance in the patient. What factor is the most likely cause of such a condition?
a. Decreased rate of metabolic processses
b. Insufficient amount of fats in the diet
c. Insufficient amount of dietary fiber
*d. Insufficient amount of proteins in the diet
e. Excessive amount of fats in the diet
212. A 42-year-old woman, who has been keeping to a vegetarian diet for a long period of time, consulted a doctor. Examination revealed negative nitrogen balance in the patient. What factor is the most likely cause of such a condition?
a. Excessive amount of fats in the diet
b. Insufficient amount of fats in the diet
c. Insufficient amount of dietary fiber
d. Decreased rate of metabolic processses
*e. Insufficient amount of proteins in the diet
213. A 42-year-old woman, who has been keeping to a vegetarian diet for a long period of time, consulted a doctor. Examination revealed negative nitrogen balance in the patient. What factor is the most likely cause of such a condition?
a. Insufficient amount of dietary fiber
b. Decreased rate of metabolic processses
c. Excessive amount of fats in the diet
d. Insufficient amount of fats in the diet
*e. Insufficient amount of proteins in the diet
214. A 43-year-old man complains of sudden skin edema and redness with vesicles and itching. He developed these signs after eating shrimps. Such local signs are characteristic of the following type of hypersensitivity:
*a. Local signs of type I hypersensitivity
b. Local signs of type IV hypersensitivity
c. Local signs of type II hypersensitivity
d. Type III hypersensitivity reaction
e. -
215. A 43-year-old man complains of sudden skin edema and redness with vesicles and itching. He developed these signs after eating shrimps. Such local signs are characteristic of the following type of hypersensitivity:
a. Local signs of type II hypersensitivity
b. Type III hypersensitivity reaction
c. -
d. Local signs of type IV hypersensitivity
*e. Local signs of type I hypersensitivity
216. A 43-year-old man complains of sudden skin edema and redness with vesicles and itching. He developed these signs after eating shrimps. Such local signs are characteristic of the following type of hypersensitivity:
a. Local signs of type II hypersensitivity
b. Type III hypersensitivity reaction
c. Local signs of type IV hypersensitivity
d. -
*e. Local signs of type I hypersensitivity
217. A 43-year-old man has stomatitis, glossitis, and a smooth crimson tongue. His complete blood count shows the following: Hb - 100 g/L, erythrocytes - 2.3  10^12/L, color index - 1.30. What pathological condition can be characterized by such clinical and laboratory findings?
a. Disturbed porphyrin synthesis
b. Iron deficiency
c. Erythrocyte hemolysis
d. Hypoplasia of the red bone marrow
*e. Vitamin B_12 deficiency
218. A 43-year-old man has stomatitis, glossitis, and a smooth crimson tongue. His complete blood count shows the following: Hb - 100 g/L, erythrocytes - 2.3  10^12/L, color index - 1.30. What pathological condition can be characterized by such clinical and laboratory findings?
a. Hypoplasia of the red bone marrow
*b. Vitamin B_12 deficiency
c. Disturbed porphyrin synthesis
d. Iron deficiency
e. Erythrocyte hemolysis
219. A 43-year-old man has stomatitis, glossitis, and a smooth crimson tongue. His complete blood count shows the following: Hb - 100 g/L, erythrocytes - 2.3  10^12/L, color index - 1.30. What pathological condition can be characterized by such clinical and laboratory findings?
a. Hypoplasia of the red bone marrow
b. Disturbed porphyrin synthesis
*c. Vitamin B_12 deficiency
d. Erythrocyte hemolysis
e. Iron deficiency
220. A 43-year-old woman against the background of septic shock presents with thrombocytopenia, decreased fibrinogen levels, fibrin degradation products appearing in the blood, and petechial hemorrhages. Specify the cause of these changes:
*a. Disseminated intravascular coagulation
b. Disturbed platelet production
c. Autoimmune thrombocytopenia
d. Hemorrhagic diathesis
e. Exogenous intoxication
221. A 43-year-old woman against the background of septic shock presents with thrombocytopenia, decreased fibrinogen levels, fibrin degradation products appearing in the blood, and petechial hemorrhages. Specify the cause of these changes:
a. Autoimmune thrombocytopenia
b. Hemorrhagic diathesis
c. Disturbed platelet production
d. Exogenous intoxication
*e. Disseminated intravascular coagulation
222. A 43-year-old woman against the background of septic shock presents with thrombocytopenia, decreased fibrinogen levels, fibrin degradation products appearing in the blood, and petechial hemorrhages. Specify the cause of these changes:
a. Hemorrhagic diathesis
b. Disturbed platelet production
*c. Disseminated intravascular coagulation
d. Autoimmune thrombocytopenia
e. Exogenous intoxication
223. A 45-year-old man came to the hospital complaining of sensory loss in the posterior 1/3 of his tongue. Which pair of the cranial nerves is functionally disturbed?
a. VIII
b. XII
*c. IX
d. V
e. X
224. A 45-year-old man came to the hospital complaining of sensory loss in the posterior 1/3 of his tongue. Which pair of the cranial nerves is functionally disturbed?
a. X
b. XII
c. VIII
d. V
*e. IX
225. A 45-year-old man came to the hospital complaining of sensory loss in the posterior 1/3 of his tongue. Which pair of the cranial nerves is functionally disturbed?
a. XII
b. X
*c. IX
d. VIII
e. V
226. A 45-year-old man had a cyst removed from the region of his gonial angle. The cyst was 1.5 cm in diameter and contained numerous keratinous masses. Histology shows that the cyst wall is thin and formed from mature connective tissue, cyst interior is lined with stratified squamous epithelium with marked parakeratosis and hyperkeratosis. Make the diagnosis:
a. Follicular ameloblastoma
b. Follicular cyst
*c. Primordial cyst
d. Cherubism
e. Radicular cyst
227. A 45-year-old man had a cyst removed from the region of his gonial angle. The cyst was 1.5 cm in diameter and contained numerous keratinous masses. Histology shows that the cyst wall is thin and formed from mature connective tissue, cyst interior is lined with stratified squamous epithelium with marked parakeratosis and hyperkeratosis. Make the diagnosis:
a. Follicular ameloblastoma
b. Follicular cyst
c. Radicular cyst
d. Cherubism
*e. Primordial cyst
228. A 45-year-old man had a cyst removed from the region of his gonial angle. The cyst was 1.5 cm in diameter and contained numerous keratinous masses. Histology shows that the cyst wall is thin and formed from mature connective tissue, cyst interior is lined with stratified squamous epithelium with marked parakeratosis and hyperkeratosis. Make the diagnosis:
a. Follicular cyst
*b. Primordial cyst
c. Cherubism
d. Follicular ameloblastoma
e. Radicular cyst
229. A 45-year-old man with a history of left-sided croupous pneumonia died of multiple traumas received as the result of a car accident. On autopsy in the lower lobe of his left lung its posterolateral wall is attached to the chest wall with fibrous adhesions. The lobe is diminished, dense, fleshy on section, grayish-pink in color; its pieces sink, when placed in water. Histological analysis reveals diffuse excessive growth of fibrous connective tissue in these areas. Name this complication of croupous pneumonia:
*a. Carneous degeneration
b. Emphysema
c. Gangrene
d. Atelectasis
e. Abscess
230. A 45-year-old man with a history of left-sided croupous pneumonia died of multiple traumas received as the result of a car accident. On autopsy in the lower lobe of his left lung its posterolateral wall is attached to the chest wall with fibrous adhesions. The lobe is diminished, dense, fleshy on section, grayish-pink in color; its pieces sink, when placed in water. Histological analysis reveals diffuse excessive growth of fibrous connective tissue in these areas. Name this complication of croupous pneumonia:
a. Abscess
b. Emphysema
c. Atelectasis
d. Gangrene
*e. Carneous degeneration
231. A 45-year-old man with a history of left-sided croupous pneumonia died of multiple traumas received as the result of a car accident. On autopsy in the lower lobe of his left lung its posterolateral wall is attached to the chest wall with fibrous adhesions. The lobe is diminished, dense, fleshy on section, grayish-pink in color; its pieces sink, when placed in water. Histological analysis reveals diffuse excessive growth of fibrous connective tissue in these areas. Name this complication of croupous pneumonia:
a. Abscess
b. Gangrene
c. Emphysema
*d. Carneous degeneration
e. Atelectasis
232. A 49-year-old man presents with facial edema, significant proteinuria, hypoproteinemia, dysproteinemia, and hyperlipidemia. What provisional diagnosis can be made?
*a. Nephrotic syndrome
b. Pyelonephritis
c. Cystitis
d. Urolithiasis
e. Prostatitis
233. A 49-year-old man presents with facial edema, significant proteinuria, hypoproteinemia, dysproteinemia, and hyperlipidemia. What provisional diagnosis can be made?
a. Cystitis
b. Pyelonephritis
c. Urolithiasis
*d. Nephrotic syndrome
e. Prostatitis
234. A 49-year-old man presents with facial edema, significant proteinuria, hypoproteinemia, dysproteinemia, and hyperlipidemia. What provisional diagnosis can be made?
a. Prostatitis
b. Cystitis
c. Pyelonephritis
*d. Nephrotic syndrome
e. Urolithiasis
235. A 5-month-old child was prescribed an antibacterial therapy for treatment of bronchopneumonia. What substance has a negative effect on teeth development?
a. Levomycetin (Chloramphenicol)
b. Nitroxoline
*c. Doxycycline
d. Biseptol (Co-trimoxazole)
e. Penicillin
236. A 5-month-old child was prescribed an antibacterial therapy for treatment of bronchopneumonia. What substance has a negative effect on teeth development?
a. Penicillin
*b. Doxycycline
c. Biseptol (Co-trimoxazole)
d. Levomycetin (Chloramphenicol)
e. Nitroxoline
237. A 5-month-old child was prescribed an antibacterial therapy for treatment of bronchopneumonia. What substance has a negative effect on teeth development?
a. Penicillin
b. Levomycetin (Chloramphenicol)
c. Nitroxoline
d. Biseptol (Co-trimoxazole)
*e. Doxycycline
238. A 5-year-old boy complains of intense headache and vomiting. Objectively, he has nuchal rigidity, vomiting without nausea, herpes rash on his face, and fever. What pathologic material should be obtained for bacteriology, to confirm the diagnosis of cerebrospinal meningitis?
a. Fecal culture of N.Meningitidis
*b. Spinal tap
c. Urine culture of N.Meningitidis
d. A sample of N.Meningitidis bacteria from urogenital mucosa
e. Vomit content analysis
239. A 5-year-old boy complains of intense headache and vomiting. Objectively, he has nuchal rigidity, vomiting without nausea, herpes rash on his face, and fever. What pathologic material should be obtained for bacteriology, to confirm the diagnosis of cerebrospinal meningitis?
a. Fecal culture of N.Meningitidis
b. Urine culture of N.Meningitidis
c. Vomit content analysis
*d. Spinal tap
e. A sample of N.Meningitidis bacteria from urogenital mucosa
240. A 5-year-old boy complains of intense headache and vomiting. Objectively, he has nuchal rigidity, vomiting without nausea, herpes rash on his face, and fever. What pathologic material should be obtained for bacteriology, to confirm the diagnosis of cerebrospinal meningitis?
a. Urine culture of N.Meningitidis
*b. Spinal tap
c. Fecal culture of N.Meningitidis
d. Vomit content analysis
e. A sample of N.Meningitidis bacteria from urogenital mucosa
241. A 5-year-old boy suffers from severe headache, nuchal rigidity, vomiting without nausea, herpetic rash on his face, and fever. Bacteriology of what pathological material must be performed to confirm the provisional diagnosis of cerebrospinal meningitis?
a. Urine culture of N. meningitidis
b. Obtaining N. meningitidis bacteria  from the mucosa of the genitourinary  system
c. Vomitus analysis
d. Stool culture of N. meningitidis
*e. Cerebrospinal fluid
242. A 5-year-old boy suffers from severe headache, nuchal rigidity, vomiting without nausea, herpetic rash on his face, and fever. Bacteriology of what pathological material must be performed to confirm the provisional diagnosis of cerebrospinal meningitis?
a. Urine culture of N. meningitidis
b. Stool culture of N. meningitidis
*c. Cerebrospinal fluid
d. Vomitus analysis
e. Obtaining N. meningitidis bacteria  from the mucosa of the genitourinary  system
243. A 5-year-old boy suffers from severe headache, nuchal rigidity, vomiting without nausea, herpetic rash on his face, and fever. Bacteriology of what pathological material must be performed to confirm the provisional diagnosis of cerebrospinal meningitis?
a. Vomitus analysis
*b. Cerebrospinal fluid
c. Urine culture of N. meningitidis
d. Stool culture of N. meningitidis
e. Obtaining N. meningitidis bacteria  from the mucosa of the genitourinary  system
244. A 5-year-old child has suffered a helminthic invasion, which resulted in sensibilization of the body. What parameters of the leukogram can confirm this process?
a. Decreased basophil count
b. Increased neutrophil count
c. Increased basophil count
d. Decreased eosinophil count
*e. Increased eosinophil count
245. A 5-year-old child has suffered a helminthic invasion, which resulted in sensibilization of the body. What parameters of the leukogram can confirm this process?
a. Decreased eosinophil count
*b. Increased eosinophil count
c. Decreased basophil count
d. Increased basophil count
e. Increased neutrophil count
246. A 5-year-old child has suffered a helminthic invasion, which resulted in sensibilization of the body. What parameters of the leukogram can confirm this process?
a. Increased neutrophil count
b. Increased basophil count
*c. Increased eosinophil count
d. Decreased eosinophil count
e. Decreased basophil count
247. A 5-year-old child was diagnosed with Duchenne muscular dystrophy. The parents are healthy. The child's maternal uncle and the son of the child's maternal aunt have myopathy too. What is the type of inheritance of this disease?
*a. X-linked recessive
b. Autosomal dominant
c. X-linked dominant
d. Autosomal recessive
e. Y-linked
248. A 5-year-old child was diagnosed with Duchenne muscular dystrophy. The parents are healthy. The child's maternal uncle and the son of the child's maternal aunt have myopathy too. What is the type of inheritance of this disease?
a. X-linked dominant
b. Y-linked
c. Autosomal recessive
d. Autosomal dominant
*e. X-linked recessive
249. A 5-year-old child was diagnosed with Duchenne muscular dystrophy. The parents are healthy. The child's maternal uncle and the son of the child's maternal aunt have myopathy too. What is the type of inheritance of this disease?
a. Y-linked
b. X-linked dominant
*c. X-linked recessive
d. Autosomal recessive
e. Autosomal dominant
250. A 50-year-old man came to a hospital with complaints of memory disorders, painful sensations along the nerve trunks, decreased mental ability, circulatory disorders and dyspepsia. Anamnesis states excessive alcohol consumption. What vitamin deficiency can result in such symptoms?
*a. Thiamine
b. Calciferol
c. Riboflavin
d. Niacin
e. Retinol
251. A 50-year-old man came to a hospital with complaints of memory disorders, painful sensations along the nerve trunks, decreased mental ability, circulatory disorders and dyspepsia. Anamnesis states excessive alcohol consumption. What vitamin deficiency can result in such symptoms?
a. Calciferol
*b. Thiamine
c. Niacin
d. Riboflavin
e. Retinol
252. A 50-year-old man came to a hospital with complaints of memory disorders, painful sensations along the nerve trunks, decreased mental ability, circulatory disorders and dyspepsia. Anamnesis states excessive alcohol consumption. What vitamin deficiency can result in such symptoms?
a. Riboflavin
b. Calciferol
c. Niacin
d. Retinol
*e. Thiamine
253. A 50-year-old man declined anaesthesia during dental manipulations. Due to severe pain he developed anuria caused by acute increase in production of:
a. Glucagon
b. Renin
c. Thyroxin
*d. Adrenaline
e. Thymosin
254. A 50-year-old man declined anaesthesia during dental manipulations. Due to severe pain he developed anuria caused by acute increase in production of:
a. Glucagon
b. Thyroxin
*c. Adrenaline
d. Thymosin
e. Renin
255. A 50-year-old man declined anaesthesia during dental manipulations. Due to severe pain he developed anuria caused by acute increase in production of:
a. Thyroxin
b. Glucagon
c. Renin
*d. Adrenaline
e. Thymosin
256. A 50-year-old man has been undergoing treatment for peptic ulcer disease of the stomach. His digestion normalized, pain disappeared, and general mood improved. However, several weeks later he again developed epigastric pain, heartburn, and sour eructation. How can this clinical course be characterized?
a. Latent period
*b. Relapse
c. Prodromal stage
d. Remission
e. Terminal state
257. A 50-year-old man has been undergoing treatment for peptic ulcer disease of the stomach. His digestion normalized, pain disappeared, and general mood improved. However, several weeks later he again developed epigastric pain, heartburn, and sour eructation. How can this clinical course be characterized?
a. Latent period
b. Remission
c. Terminal state
d. Prodromal stage
*e. Relapse
258. A 50-year-old man has been undergoing treatment for peptic ulcer disease of the stomach. His digestion normalized, pain disappeared, and general mood improved. However, several weeks later he again developed epigastric pain, heartburn, and sour eructation. How can this clinical course be characterized?
a. Remission
b. Latent period
c. Prodromal stage
*d. Relapse
e. Terminal state
259. A 50-year-old man, who has been suffering from chronic hepatic failure for years, developed ascites. What is the main mechanism of development of this new disorder in the patient?
*a. Increased pressure in the portal venous system
b. Decreased hepatic synthesis of albumins and globulins
c. Increased oncotic blood pressure
d. Appearance of neurotoxic substances in blood
e. Increased blood levels of low density and very low density lipoproteins
260. A 50-year-old man, who has been suffering from chronic hepatic failure for years, developed ascites. What is the main mechanism of development of this new disorder in the patient?
*a. Increased pressure in the portal venous system
b. Increased oncotic blood pressure
c. Decreased hepatic synthesis of albumins and globulins
d. Increased blood levels of low density and very low density lipoproteins
e. Appearance of neurotoxic substances in blood
261. A 50-year-old man, who has been suffering from chronic hepatic failure for years, developed ascites. What is the main mechanism of development of this new disorder in the patient?
a. Appearance of neurotoxic substances in blood
*b. Increased pressure in the portal venous system
c. Increased blood levels of low density and very low density lipoproteins
d. Increased oncotic blood pressure
e. Decreased hepatic synthesis of albumins and globulins
262. A 50-year-old patient suddenly developed headache, dizziness, and nausea. Blood pressure --- 220/110 mm Hg. After intravenous administration of a 0.1% hygronium solution, the patient's condition improved. What is the mechanism of action of this drug?
a. Angiotensin-converting enzyme blockade
b. Blockade of Ca^++ channels
*c. Blockade of nicotinic acetylcholine ganglion receptors
d. Activation of alpha_2-adrenoceptors
e. Blockade of beta_1-adrenoceptors
263. A 50-year-old patient suddenly developed headache, dizziness, and nausea. Blood pressure --- 220/110 mm Hg. After intravenous administration of a 0.1% hygronium solution, the patient's condition improved. What is the mechanism of action of this drug?
a. Blockade of Ca^++ channels
*b. Blockade of nicotinic acetylcholine ganglion receptors
c. Activation of alpha_2-adrenoceptors
d. Angiotensin-converting enzyme blockade
e. Blockade of beta_1-adrenoceptors
264. A 50-year-old patient suddenly developed headache, dizziness, and nausea. Blood pressure --- 220/110 mm Hg. After intravenous administration of a 0.1% hygronium solution, the patient's condition improved. What is the mechanism of action of this drug?
a. Blockade of beta_1-adrenoceptors
*b. Blockade of nicotinic acetylcholine ganglion receptors
c. Activation of alpha_2-adrenoceptors
d. Blockade of Ca^++ channels
e. Angiotensin-converting enzyme blockade
265. A 50-year-old patient was diagnosed with myxedema. The development of this pathology is caused by disturbed production of certain hormones. Name these hormones.
a. Insulin and glucagon
b. Oxytocin and vasopressin
c. Cortisol and aldosterone
d. ACTH and growth hormone
*e. Thyroxine and triiodothyronine
266. A 50-year-old patient was diagnosed with myxedema. The development of this pathology is caused by disturbed production of certain hormones. Name these hormones.
a. Oxytocin and vasopressin
b. Cortisol and aldosterone
c. ACTH and growth hormone
d. Insulin and glucagon
*e. Thyroxine and triiodothyronine
267. A 50-year-old patient was diagnosed with myxedema. The development of this pathology is caused by disturbed production of certain hormones. Name these hormones.
a. Oxytocin and vasopressin
b. Insulin and glucagon
*c. Thyroxine and triiodothyronine
d. ACTH and growth hormone
e. Cortisol and aldosterone
268. A 50-year-old patient, who recovered from a heart attack, five years later died of chronic heart failure. Autopsy detects a dense sac-like protrusion on the lateral surface of the wall of the left ventricle. The wall in this place is thinned out, dense, and gray. What cardiac pathology can be characterized by these changes?
a. Cardiosclerosis
*b. Chronic aneurysm
c. Myocarditis
d. Myocardial infarction
e. Cardiomyopathy
269. A 50-year-old patient, who recovered from a heart attack, five years later died of chronic heart failure. Autopsy detects a dense sac-like protrusion on the lateral surface of the wall of the left ventricle. The wall in this place is thinned out, dense, and gray. What cardiac pathology can be characterized by these changes?
a. Cardiosclerosis
b. Cardiomyopathy
c. Myocarditis
*d. Chronic aneurysm
e. Myocardial infarction
270. A 50-year-old patient, who recovered from a heart attack, five years later died of chronic heart failure. Autopsy detects a dense sac-like protrusion on the lateral surface of the wall of the left ventricle. The wall in this place is thinned out, dense, and gray. What cardiac pathology can be characterized by these changes?
a. Cardiosclerosis
b. Myocardial infarction
c. Myocarditis
d. Cardiomyopathy
*e. Chronic aneurysm
271. A 52-year-old man was diagnosed with systemic amebiasis that affects intestine, liver, and lungs. What drug should be administered in this case?
a. Chiniofon
b. Enteroseptol
*c. Metronidazole
d. Chingamin (Chloroquine)
e. Tetracycline
272. A 52-year-old man was diagnosed with systemic amebiasis that affects intestine, liver, and lungs. What drug should be administered in this case?
a. Enteroseptol
b. Tetracycline
c. Chingamin (Chloroquine)
d. Chiniofon
*e. Metronidazole
273. A 52-year-old man was diagnosed with systemic amebiasis that affects intestine, liver, and lungs. What drug should be administered in this case?
a. Tetracycline
b. Chingamin (Chloroquine)
c. Enteroseptol
*d. Metronidazole
e. Chiniofon
274. A 52-year-old woman was injected with a local anesthetic before the tooth extraction. What mechanism of action underlies the analgesic effect of this drug?
a. Disrupted anatomical intactness of the nerve fibers
*b. Disrupted physiological intactness of  the nerve fibers
c. Disrupted isolated conduction of  excitation in the nerve fibers
d. Disrupted axonal transport in the nerve fibers
e. Disrupted functioning of microtubules in the nerve fibers
275. A 52-year-old woman was injected with a local anesthetic before the tooth extraction. What mechanism of action underlies the analgesic effect of this drug?
a. Disrupted anatomical intactness of the nerve fibers
b. Disrupted isolated conduction of  excitation in the nerve fibers
c. Disrupted axonal transport in the nerve fibers
*d. Disrupted physiological intactness of  the nerve fibers
e. Disrupted functioning of microtubules in the nerve fibers
276. A 52-year-old woman was injected with a local anesthetic before the tooth extraction. What mechanism of action underlies the analgesic effect of this drug?
a. Disrupted anatomical intactness of the nerve fibers
b. Disrupted isolated conduction of  excitation in the nerve fibers
c. Disrupted functioning of microtubules in the nerve fibers
d. Disrupted axonal transport in the nerve fibers
*e. Disrupted physiological intactness of  the nerve fibers
277. A 53-year-old woman complains of painful swelling in her left parotid area. The swelling appeared 5 days ago. Objectively the skin in this area is slightly hyperemic and tender. Excretory duct of the salivary gland produces a small amount of viscous turbid yellow-green liquid. Microscopy detects a diffuse infiltration of the gland with segmented neutrophils. Make the diagnosis:
a. Epidemic parotitis
b. Glandular adenoma
c. Sjogren syndrome
d. Acute serous parotitis
*e. Acute suppurative parotitis
278. A 53-year-old woman complains of painful swelling in her left parotid area. The swelling appeared 5 days ago. Objectively the skin in this area is slightly hyperemic and tender. Excretory duct of the salivary gland produces a small amount of viscous turbid yellow-green liquid. Microscopy detects a diffuse infiltration of the gland with segmented neutrophils. Make the diagnosis:
a. Sjogren syndrome
*b. Acute suppurative parotitis
c. Acute serous parotitis
d. Epidemic parotitis
e. Glandular adenoma
279. A 53-year-old woman complains of painful swelling in her left parotid area. The swelling appeared 5 days ago. Objectively the skin in this area is slightly hyperemic and tender. Excretory duct of the salivary gland produces a small amount of viscous turbid yellow-green liquid. Microscopy detects a diffuse infiltration of the gland with segmented neutrophils. Make the diagnosis:
a. Sjogren syndrome
b. Acute serous parotitis
c. Epidemic parotitis
d. Glandular adenoma
*e. Acute suppurative parotitis
280. A 55-year-old man was diagnosed with acute glomerulonephritis. Name the main mechanism of anemia development in this case:
a. Decreased glomerular filtration
*b. Decreased erythropoietin synthesis
c. Decreased synthesis of renal prostaglandins
d. Renal azotemia
e. Decreased tubular reabsorption
281. A 55-year-old man was diagnosed with acute glomerulonephritis. Name the main mechanism of anemia development in this case:
a. Decreased synthesis of renal prostaglandins
b. Decreased tubular reabsorption
*c. Decreased erythropoietin synthesis
d. Decreased glomerular filtration
e. Renal azotemia
282. A 55-year-old man was diagnosed with acute glomerulonephritis. Name the main mechanism of anemia development in this case:
a. Decreased tubular reabsorption
b. Decreased glomerular filtration
c. Renal azotemia
*d. Decreased erythropoietin synthesis
e. Decreased synthesis of renal prostaglandins
283. A 55-year-old man was diagnosed with purulent otitis complicated with meningitis. The posterior cranial fossa was contaminated by pus. What wall of the tympanic cavity was destroyed in this case?
a. Paries jugularis
*b. Paries mastoideus
c. Paries labyrinthicus
d. Paries tegmentalis
e. Paries membranaceus
284. A 55-year-old man was diagnosed with purulent otitis complicated with meningitis. The posterior cranial fossa was contaminated by pus. What wall of the tympanic cavity was destroyed in this case?
a. Paries jugularis
b. Paries membranaceus
c. Paries labyrinthicus
d. Paries tegmentalis
*e. Paries mastoideus
285. A 55-year-old man was diagnosed with purulent otitis complicated with meningitis. The posterior cranial fossa was contaminated by pus. What wall of the tympanic cavity was destroyed in this case?
a. Paries labyrinthicus
b. Paries jugularis
*c. Paries mastoideus
d. Paries tegmentalis
e. Paries membranaceus
286. A 55-year-old man with radiation sickness was brought into the hospital with signs of hemorrhagic syndrome. What changes in his blood are the most important in the pathogenesis of this syndrome?
*a. Thrombocytopenia
b. Neutropenia
c. Lymphopenia
d. Immune tolerance
e. Eosinopenia
287. A 55-year-old man with radiation sickness was brought into the hospital with signs of hemorrhagic syndrome. What changes in his blood are the most important in the pathogenesis of this syndrome?
a. Eosinopenia
b. Neutropenia
*c. Thrombocytopenia
d. Immune tolerance
e. Lymphopenia
288. A 55-year-old man with radiation sickness was brought into the hospital with signs of hemorrhagic syndrome. What changes in his blood are the most important in the pathogenesis of this syndrome?
a. Lymphopenia
b. Neutropenia
c. Immune tolerance
*d. Thrombocytopenia
e. Eosinopenia
289. A 56-year-old man with a valvular defect complains of lower limb edemas that lately increased in frequency. Name the local pathogenetic factor of edema development in this case:
a. Decrease of hydrodynamic blood pressure
*b. Increase of hydrodynamic blood pressure
c. Decrease of vessel wall permeability
d. Increase of interstitial pressure
e. Increase of oncotic blood pressure
290. A 56-year-old man with a valvular defect complains of lower limb edemas that lately increased in frequency. Name the local pathogenetic factor of edema development in this case:
a. Decrease of hydrodynamic blood pressure
b. Decrease of vessel wall permeability
c. Increase of oncotic blood pressure
d. Increase of interstitial pressure
*e. Increase of hydrodynamic blood pressure
291. A 56-year-old man with a valvular defect complains of lower limb edemas that lately increased in frequency. Name the local pathogenetic factor of edema development in this case:
a. Increase of interstitial pressure
b. Decrease of hydrodynamic blood pressure
c. Increase of oncotic blood pressure
*d. Increase of hydrodynamic blood pressure
e. Decrease of vessel wall permeability
292. A 57-year-old man with chronic pyelonephritis developed arterial hypertension. What is the main mechanism of arterial pressure increase in this case?
*a. Increased renin secretion in the kidneys
b. Stimulation of hypothalamic vegetative centers
c. Stimulation of sinocarotid baroreceptors
d. Stimulation of the cerebral cortex
e. Increased blood levels of catecholamines
293. A 57-year-old man with chronic pyelonephritis developed arterial hypertension. What is the main mechanism of arterial pressure increase in this case?
a. Increased blood levels of catecholamines
b. Stimulation of the cerebral cortex
c. Stimulation of hypothalamic vegetative centers
*d. Increased renin secretion in the kidneys
e. Stimulation of sinocarotid baroreceptors
294. A 57-year-old man with chronic pyelonephritis developed arterial hypertension. What is the main mechanism of arterial pressure increase in this case?
a. Stimulation of sinocarotid baroreceptors
b. Stimulation of the cerebral cortex
*c. Increased renin secretion in the kidneys
d. Increased blood levels of catecholamines
e. Stimulation of hypothalamic vegetative centers
295. A 58-year-old man has a clinical presentation of acute pancreatitis. This diagnosis can be confirmed, if urine levels of a certain substance are elevated. Name this substance:
*a. Amylase
b. UreaD) Albumin
c. Residual nitrogen
d. Uric acid
296. A 58-year-old man has a clinical presentation of acute pancreatitis. This diagnosis can be confirmed, if urine levels of a certain substance are elevated. Name this substance:
*a. Amylase
b. Uric acid
c. UreaD) Albumin
d. Residual nitrogen
297. A 58-year-old man has a clinical presentation of acute pancreatitis. This diagnosis can be confirmed, if urine levels of a certain substance are elevated. Name this substance:
a. Uric acid
*b. Amylase
c. UreaD) Albumin
d. Residual nitrogen
298. A 58-year-old man with acute heart failure developed decreased daily diuresis - oliguria. What is the mechanism of this phenomenon?
a. Decreased number of functional glomeruli
*b. Decreased glomerular filtration
c. Decreased permeability of membrane glomeruli
d. Increased hydrostatic pressure on the capillary wall
e. Decreased oncotic blood pressure
299. A 58-year-old man with acute heart failure developed decreased daily diuresis - oliguria. What is the mechanism of this phenomenon?
a. Decreased oncotic blood pressure
*b. Decreased glomerular filtration
c. Decreased number of functional glomeruli
d. Decreased permeability of membrane glomeruli
e. Increased hydrostatic pressure on the capillary wall
300. A 58-year-old man with acute heart failure developed decreased daily diuresis - oliguria. What is the mechanism of this phenomenon?
a. Decreased oncotic blood pressure
*b. Decreased glomerular filtration
c. Increased hydrostatic pressure on the capillary wall
d. Decreased permeability of membrane glomeruli
e. Decreased number of functional glomeruli
301. A 59-year-old man has a nervous system disorder (chorea) that manifests as involuntary rapid movements and grimacing. This nervous system disorder occurs because of damage to a certain brain structure. What structure is damaged in this case, causing this disorder?
*a. Corpus striatum
b. Amygdala
c. Thalamus
d. Darkschewitsch nuclei
e. Claustrum
302. A 59-year-old man has a nervous system disorder (chorea) that manifests as involuntary rapid movements and grimacing. This nervous system disorder occurs because of damage to a certain brain structure. What structure is damaged in this case, causing this disorder?
a. Claustrum
b. Amygdala
c. Darkschewitsch nuclei
*d. Corpus striatum
e. Thalamus
303. A 59-year-old man has a nervous system disorder (chorea) that manifests as involuntary rapid movements and grimacing. This nervous system disorder occurs because of damage to a certain brain structure. What structure is damaged in this case, causing this disorder?
a. Thalamus
b. Claustrum
c. Amygdala
*d. Corpus striatum
e. Darkschewitsch nuclei
304. A 59-year-old man has signs of parenchymal jaundice and portal hypertension. Histology of the puncture biopsy material, obtained from the patient's liver, shows the following: disturbed lobar and trabecular structure, signs of fatty degeneration in a portion of hepatocytes, formation of porto-portal connective tissue septa with pseudolobules and periportal lympho-macrophageal infiltrations. Make the diagnosis:
*a. Hepatic cirrhosis
b. Chronic hepatosis
c. Alcoholic hepatitis
d. Toxic dystrophy
e. Viral hepatitis
305. A 59-year-old man has signs of parenchymal jaundice and portal hypertension. Histology of the puncture biopsy material, obtained from the patient's liver, shows the following: disturbed lobar and trabecular structure, signs of fatty degeneration in a portion of hepatocytes, formation of porto-portal connective tissue septa with pseudolobules and periportal lympho-macrophageal infiltrations. Make the diagnosis:
a. Chronic hepatosis
b. Viral hepatitis
c. Toxic dystrophy
d. Alcoholic hepatitis
*e. Hepatic cirrhosis
306. A 59-year-old man has signs of parenchymal jaundice and portal hypertension. Histology of the puncture biopsy material, obtained from the patient's liver, shows the following: disturbed lobar and trabecular structure, signs of fatty degeneration in a portion of hepatocytes, formation of porto-portal connective tissue septa with pseudolobules and periportal lympho-macrophageal infiltrations. Make the diagnosis:
a. Viral hepatitis
b. Alcoholic hepatitis
c. Chronic hepatosis
*d. Hepatic cirrhosis
e. Toxic dystrophy
307. A 59-year-old man was diagnosed with a transmural left ventricular myocardial infarction. He died of a true heart rupture - cardiac tamponade. What process in the infarction site could have contributed to the cardiac rupture in this case?
*a. Autolytic processes of myocardial  softening (myomalacia)
b. Replacement of the infarct site with  connective tissue (organization)
c. Scar formation with thinning of the left  ventricular wall
d. Increased pressure in the pulmonary  circulation
e. -
308. A 59-year-old man was diagnosed with a transmural left ventricular myocardial infarction. He died of a true heart rupture - cardiac tamponade. What process in the infarction site could have contributed to the cardiac rupture in this case?
a. -
b. Scar formation with thinning of the left  ventricular wall
c. Increased pressure in the pulmonary  circulation
d. Replacement of the infarct site with  connective tissue (organization)
*e. Autolytic processes of myocardial  softening (myomalacia)
309. A 59-year-old man was diagnosed with a transmural left ventricular myocardial infarction. He died of a true heart rupture - cardiac tamponade. What process in the infarction site could have contributed to the cardiac rupture in this case?
a. Scar formation with thinning of the left  ventricular wall
*b. Autolytic processes of myocardial  softening (myomalacia)
c. Replacement of the infarct site with  connective tissue (organization)
d. -
e. Increased pressure in the pulmonary  circulation
310. A 59-year-old man was diagnosed with chorea that manifests as involuntary rapid movements accompanied by grimaces. Chorea development is associated with damage to a certain brain structure. Name this brain structure.
a. Claustrum
b. Thalamus
c. Amygdala
*d. Striatum
e. N. fasciculi longitudinalis medialis (Darkshewitch nuclei)
311. A 59-year-old man was diagnosed with chorea that manifests as involuntary rapid movements accompanied by grimaces. Chorea development is associated with damage to a certain brain structure. Name this brain structure.
a. N. fasciculi longitudinalis medialis (Darkshewitch nuclei)
*b. Striatum
c. Amygdala
d. Thalamus
e. Claustrum
312. A 59-year-old man was diagnosed with chorea that manifests as involuntary rapid movements accompanied by grimaces. Chorea development is associated with damage to a certain brain structure. Name this brain structure.
a. N. fasciculi longitudinalis medialis (Darkshewitch nuclei)
b. Thalamus
*c. Striatum
d. Claustrum
e. Amygdala
313. A 6-month-old child has a dense red nodule on the skin. The nodule becomes pale when pressed. What disease can be characterized by these pathological changes?
a. Leiomyoma
b. Pigmented nevus
c. Lymphangioma
d. Melanoma
*e. Hemangioma
314. A 6-month-old child has a dense red nodule on the skin. The nodule becomes pale when pressed. What disease can be characterized by these pathological changes?
a. Lymphangioma
b. Melanoma
c. Pigmented nevus
*d. Hemangioma
e. Leiomyoma
315. A 6-month-old child has a dense red nodule on the skin. The nodule becomes pale when pressed. What disease can be characterized by these pathological changes?
a. Lymphangioma
b. Pigmented nevus
*c. Hemangioma
d. Leiomyoma
e. Melanoma
316. A 6-month-old child has a flat node on the skin of the back. The node is 3 cm in diameter, red, but becomes pale when pressed. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Hemangioma
b. Lymphangioma
c. Leiomyoma
d. Pigmented nevus
e. Melanoma
317. A 6-month-old child has a flat node on the skin of the back. The node is 3 cm in diameter, red, but becomes pale when pressed. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Hemangioma
b. Melanoma
c. Lymphangioma
d. Leiomyoma
e. Pigmented nevus
318. A 6-month-old child has a flat node on the skin of the back. The node is 3 cm in diameter, red, but becomes pale when pressed. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Melanoma
b. Lymphangioma
c. Pigmented nevus
d. Leiomyoma
*e. Hemangioma
319. A 6-year-old girl exhibits marked signs of hemolytic anemia. Biochemical anlysis of her erythrocytes shows deficiency of glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase enzyme. What metabolic process is disturbed in this patient and has leading role in the development of this pathology?
*a. Pentose-phosphate pathway
b. Anaerobic glycolysis
c. Oxidative phosphorylation
d. Gluconeogenesis
e. Tissue respiration
320. A 6-year-old girl exhibits marked signs of hemolytic anemia. Biochemical anlysis of her erythrocytes shows deficiency of glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase enzyme. What metabolic process is disturbed in this patient and has leading role in the development of this pathology?
a. Tissue respiration
b. Anaerobic glycolysis
*c. Pentose-phosphate pathway
d. Oxidative phosphorylation
e. Gluconeogenesis
321. A 6-year-old girl exhibits marked signs of hemolytic anemia. Biochemical anlysis of her erythrocytes shows deficiency of glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase enzyme. What metabolic process is disturbed in this patient and has leading role in the development of this pathology?
a. Tissue respiration
b. Gluconeogenesis
c. Anaerobic glycolysis
*d. Pentose-phosphate pathway
e. Oxidative phosphorylation
322. A 60-year-old man with diabetes mellitus was prescribed insulin. What type of pharmacological therapy is it?
a. Etiotropic
*b. Replacement
c. Pathogenetic
d. Preventive
e. Symptomatic
323. A 60-year-old man with diabetes mellitus was prescribed insulin. What type of pharmacological therapy is it?
a. Etiotropic
b. Pathogenetic
*c. Replacement
d. Preventive
e. Symptomatic
324. A 60-year-old man with diabetes mellitus was prescribed insulin. What type of pharmacological therapy is it?
a. Etiotropic
b. Symptomatic
c. Preventive
*d. Replacement
e. Pathogenetic
325. A 60-year-old man with heart failure developed hypoxia. What type of hypoxia is primary in this case?
*a. Circulatory hypoxia
b. Hemic hypoxia
c. Hypoxic hypoxia
d. Tissue hypoxia
e. Respiratory hypoxia
326. A 60-year-old man with heart failure developed hypoxia. What type of hypoxia is primary in this case?
a. Hemic hypoxia
b. Hypoxic hypoxia
c. Tissue hypoxia
d. Respiratory hypoxia
*e. Circulatory hypoxia
327. A 60-year-old man with heart failure developed hypoxia. What type of hypoxia is primary in this case?
a. Hemic hypoxia
b. Respiratory hypoxia
c. Hypoxic hypoxia
*d. Circulatory hypoxia
e. Tissue hypoxia
328. A 60-year-old patient died of cardiopulmonary failure. In the lower lobes of both lungs, the walls of the bronchi are of varying thickness and have bag-like distensions. In some of the distended bronchi, their lumina are filled with purulent masses. In the bronchial walls, histology detects destruction of non-striated muscle fibers and elastic fibers, as well as chronic inflammatory infiltration of the tissue. What disease can be characterized by these pathological changes?
*a. Bronchiectasis
b. Chronic bronchitis
c. Metaplasia of bronchial epithelium
d. Acute bronchitis
e. Bronchogenic carcinoma
329. A 60-year-old patient died of cardiopulmonary failure. In the lower lobes of both lungs, the walls of the bronchi are of varying thickness and have bag-like distensions. In some of the distended bronchi, their lumina are filled with purulent masses. In the bronchial walls, histology detects destruction of non-striated muscle fibers and elastic fibers, as well as chronic inflammatory infiltration of the tissue. What disease can be characterized by these pathological changes?
a. Bronchogenic carcinoma
b. Acute bronchitis
c. Metaplasia of bronchial epithelium
d. Chronic bronchitis
*e. Bronchiectasis
330. A 60-year-old patient died of cardiopulmonary failure. In the lower lobes of both lungs, the walls of the bronchi are of varying thickness and have bag-like distensions. In some of the distended bronchi, their lumina are filled with purulent masses. In the bronchial walls, histology detects destruction of non-striated muscle fibers and elastic fibers, as well as chronic inflammatory infiltration of the tissue. What disease can be characterized by these pathological changes?
a. Chronic bronchitis
b. Acute bronchitis
c. Bronchogenic carcinoma
d. Metaplasia of bronchial epithelium
*e. Bronchiectasis
331. A 60-year-old woman with hepatocirrhosis developed hemorrhagic syndrome. What mechanism leads to the development of this condition?
*a. Decreased synthesis of prothrombin and fibrinogen
b. Deceased blood oncotic pressure
c. Reduction of hepatic glycogen stores
d. Emergence of neurotoxins in the blood
e. Increased portal venous pressure
332. A 60-year-old woman with hepatocirrhosis developed hemorrhagic syndrome. What mechanism leads to the development of this condition?
a. Deceased blood oncotic pressure
b. Emergence of neurotoxins in the blood
*c. Decreased synthesis of prothrombin and fibrinogen
d. Increased portal venous pressure
e. Reduction of hepatic glycogen stores
333. A 60-year-old woman with hepatocirrhosis developed hemorrhagic syndrome. What mechanism leads to the development of this condition?
a. Reduction of hepatic glycogen stores
b. Deceased blood oncotic pressure
c. Emergence of neurotoxins in the blood
*d. Decreased synthesis of prothrombin and fibrinogen
e. Increased portal venous pressure
334. A 61-year-old patient died in the intensive care unit due to multiple organ dysfunction syndrome. Previously, the patient underwent a surgery for acute purulent periostitis. Histology of necropsy materials revealed hyperplasia of the lymphoid tissue of the tonsils, diffuse neutrophilic infiltration of the necrotically changed alveolar process of the jaw, regional purulent lymphadenitis, soft tissue phlegmon of the neck, bilateral polysegmental purulent pneumonia, splenomegaly, irreversible changes in cardiomyocytes and epithelium of the renal tubules. Postmortem bacteriology detected Staphylococcus aureus in the blood. What disease is the cause of these pathological manifestations?
*a. Odontogenic sepsis
b. Surgical sepsis
c. Treatment-induced sepsis
d. Tonsilogenic sepsis
e. Cryptogenic sepsis
335. A 61-year-old patient died in the intensive care unit due to multiple organ dysfunction syndrome. Previously, the patient underwent a surgery for acute purulent periostitis. Histology of necropsy materials revealed hyperplasia of the lymphoid tissue of the tonsils, diffuse neutrophilic infiltration of the necrotically changed alveolar process of the jaw, regional purulent lymphadenitis, soft tissue phlegmon of the neck, bilateral polysegmental purulent pneumonia, splenomegaly, irreversible changes in cardiomyocytes and epithelium of the renal tubules. Postmortem bacteriology detected Staphylococcus aureus in the blood. What disease is the cause of these pathological manifestations?
a. Cryptogenic sepsis
*b. Odontogenic sepsis
c. Treatment-induced sepsis
d. Surgical sepsis
e. Tonsilogenic sepsis
336. A 61-year-old patient died in the intensive care unit due to multiple organ dysfunction syndrome. Previously, the patient underwent a surgery for acute purulent periostitis. Histology of necropsy materials revealed hyperplasia of the lymphoid tissue of the tonsils, diffuse neutrophilic infiltration of the necrotically changed alveolar process of the jaw, regional purulent lymphadenitis, soft tissue phlegmon of the neck, bilateral polysegmental purulent pneumonia, splenomegaly, irreversible changes in cardiomyocytes and epithelium of the renal tubules. Postmortem bacteriology detected Staphylococcus aureus in the blood. What disease is the cause of these pathological manifestations?
a. Surgical sepsis
b. Treatment-induced sepsis
*c. Odontogenic sepsis
d. Cryptogenic sepsis
e. Tonsilogenic sepsis
337. A 62-year-old woman has insomnia. What medicine should she be prescribed?
*a. Nitrazepam
b. Piracetam
c. Caffeine and sodium benzoate
d. Droperidol
e. Dimedrol (Diphenhydramine)
338. A 62-year-old woman has insomnia. What medicine should she be prescribed?
a. Dimedrol (Diphenhydramine)
*b. Nitrazepam
c. Caffeine and sodium benzoate
d. Piracetam
e. Droperidol
339. A 62-year-old woman has insomnia. What medicine should she be prescribed?
a. Dimedrol (Diphenhydramine)
*b. Nitrazepam
c. Piracetam
d. Droperidol
e. Caffeine and sodium benzoate
340. A 63-year-old man was diagnosed with deep vein thrombophlebitis of the lower leg. What layer of these vessels is damaged in this case?
a. Connective tissue layer
b. Subendothelial layer
*c. Endothelial layer
d. Layer of smooth muscle cells
e. Layer of elastic fibers
341. A 63-year-old man was diagnosed with deep vein thrombophlebitis of the lower leg. What layer of these vessels is damaged in this case?
a. Layer of smooth muscle cells
*b. Endothelial layer
c. Subendothelial layer
d. Layer of elastic fibers
e. Connective tissue layer
342. A 63-year-old man was diagnosed with deep vein thrombophlebitis of the lower leg. What layer of these vessels is damaged in this case?
a. Subendothelial layer
b. Connective tissue layer
*c. Endothelial layer
d. Layer of elastic fibers
e. Layer of smooth muscle cells
343. A 65-year-old man came to the general physician. He complains of dyspnea during even slight physical exertion, cyanotic skin, and leg edemas. Prescribe him a cardiac glycoside for treatment of chronic heart failure:
*a. Digoxin
b. Methyluracil
c. Heparin
d. Metoprolol
e. Panangin (potassium aspartate and magnesium aspartate)
344. A 65-year-old man came to the general physician. He complains of dyspnea during even slight physical exertion, cyanotic skin, and leg edemas. Prescribe him a cardiac glycoside for treatment of chronic heart failure:
a. Heparin
*b. Digoxin
c. Panangin (potassium aspartate and magnesium aspartate)
d. Metoprolol
e. Methyluracil
345. A 65-year-old man came to the general physician. He complains of dyspnea during even slight physical exertion, cyanotic skin, and leg edemas. Prescribe him a cardiac glycoside for treatment of chronic heart failure:
a. Heparin
b. Panangin (potassium aspartate and magnesium aspartate)
c. Methyluracil
d. Metoprolol
*e. Digoxin
346. A 65-year-old man presents with acute mandibular osteomyelitis. 3 days after the disease onset he developed marked edema of skin and soft submandibular cervical tissues. Microscopically there is a diffuse infiltration with neutrophils. What complication of the main disease occurred in the patient's skin tissues?
*a. Phlegmon
b. Abscess
c. Carbuncle
d. Furuncle
e. Actinomycosis
347. A 65-year-old man presents with acute mandibular osteomyelitis. 3 days after the disease onset he developed marked edema of skin and soft submandibular cervical tissues. Microscopically there is a diffuse infiltration with neutrophils. What complication of the main disease occurred in the patient's skin tissues?
a. Actinomycosis
*b. Phlegmon
c. Furuncle
d. Abscess
e. Carbuncle
348. A 65-year-old man presents with acute mandibular osteomyelitis. 3 days after the disease onset he developed marked edema of skin and soft submandibular cervical tissues. Microscopically there is a diffuse infiltration with neutrophils. What complication of the main disease occurred in the patient's skin tissues?
a. Furuncle
*b. Phlegmon
c. Actinomycosis
d. Abscess
e. Carbuncle
349. A 65-year-old patient underwent surgical removal of a patch of mucosa on the lower surface of the tongue that had a large gray-white plaque with clear contours and a rough surface that could not be scraped off. The patient's history states that he is a heavy smoker. Microscopically, the following is observed: hyperplasia, hyperkeratosis, parakeratosis, acanthosis of the stratified epithelium, lymphoplasmacytic infiltration, and fibrosis of the mucosal lamina propria. What pathology of the tongue is it?
*a. Leukoplakia
b. Lupus erythematosus
c. Lichen ruber planus
d. Chronic candidiasis
e. Keratoacanthoma
350. A 65-year-old patient underwent surgical removal of a patch of mucosa on the lower surface of the tongue that had a large gray-white plaque with clear contours and a rough surface that could not be scraped off. The patient's history states that he is a heavy smoker. Microscopically, the following is observed: hyperplasia, hyperkeratosis, parakeratosis, acanthosis of the stratified epithelium, lymphoplasmacytic infiltration, and fibrosis of the mucosal lamina propria. What pathology of the tongue is it?
a. Keratoacanthoma
b. Chronic candidiasis
c. Lupus erythematosus
*d. Leukoplakia
e. Lichen ruber planus
351. A 65-year-old patient underwent surgical removal of a patch of mucosa on the lower surface of the tongue that had a large gray-white plaque with clear contours and a rough surface that could not be scraped off. The patient's history states that he is a heavy smoker. Microscopically, the following is observed: hyperplasia, hyperkeratosis, parakeratosis, acanthosis of the stratified epithelium, lymphoplasmacytic infiltration, and fibrosis of the mucosal lamina propria. What pathology of the tongue is it?
a. Lupus erythematosus
b. Lichen ruber planus
*c. Leukoplakia
d. Chronic candidiasis
e. Keratoacanthoma
352. A 65-year-old woman with pathological fractures of the mandible had a 15-year-long history of chronic osteomyelitis. Against the background of deterioration of her general condition, her blood test detected hypoproteinemia and dysproteinemia, while urinalysis detected proteinuria and protein casts. The woman died of chronic kidney failure. What pathological process is most likely to be observed in the kidneys during autopsy?
a. Chronic glomerulonephritis
b. Primary amyloidosis of the kidneys
c. Pyelonephritis
d. Hydronephrosis
*e. Secondary amyloidosis of the kidneys
353. A 65-year-old woman with pathological fractures of the mandible had a 15-year-long history of chronic osteomyelitis. Against the background of deterioration of her general condition, her blood test detected hypoproteinemia and dysproteinemia, while urinalysis detected proteinuria and protein casts. The woman died of chronic kidney failure. What pathological process is most likely to be observed in the kidneys during autopsy?
a. Hydronephrosis
b. Chronic glomerulonephritis
*c. Secondary amyloidosis of the kidneys
d. Primary amyloidosis of the kidneys
e. Pyelonephritis
354. A 65-year-old woman with pathological fractures of the mandible had a 15-year-long history of chronic osteomyelitis. Against the background of deterioration of her general condition, her blood test detected hypoproteinemia and dysproteinemia, while urinalysis detected proteinuria and protein casts. The woman died of chronic kidney failure. What pathological process is most likely to be observed in the kidneys during autopsy?
a. Pyelonephritis
b. Chronic glomerulonephritis
c. Hydronephrosis
d. Primary amyloidosis of the kidneys
*e. Secondary amyloidosis of the kidneys
355. A 66-year-old man was diagnosed with a malignant epithelial tumor, originating from a middle-sized bronchus. What epithelium is the source of tumor development in this case?
a. Simple columnar epithelium
b. Stratified non-cornified epithelium
*c. Simple pseudostratified ciliated epithelium
d. Stratified cornified epithelium
e. Simple pseudostratified transitional epithelium
356. A 66-year-old man was diagnosed with a malignant epithelial tumor, originating from a middle-sized bronchus. What epithelium is the source of tumor development in this case?
a. Simple pseudostratified transitional epithelium
b. Simple columnar epithelium
c. Stratified cornified epithelium
d. Stratified non-cornified epithelium
*e. Simple pseudostratified ciliated epithelium
357. A 66-year-old man was diagnosed with a malignant epithelial tumor, originating from a middle-sized bronchus. What epithelium is the source of tumor development in this case?
a. Stratified cornified epithelium
b. Simple columnar epithelium
c. Simple pseudostratified transitional epithelium
*d. Simple pseudostratified ciliated epithelium
e. Stratified non-cornified epithelium
358. A 66-year-old man was given a magnesium sulfate solution intravenously for hypertensive crisis relief. However, his blood pressure did not decrease. After a repeated administration of this medicine he developed inertness, sluggishness, and depressed consciousness and respiration. What drug is a magnesium sulfate antagonist and removes the signs of its overdosage?
*a. Calcium chloride
b. Activated charcoal
c. Potassium permanganate
d. Sodium chloride
e. Potassium chloride
359. A 66-year-old man was given a magnesium sulfate solution intravenously for hypertensive crisis relief. However, his blood pressure did not decrease. After a repeated administration of this medicine he developed inertness, sluggishness, and depressed consciousness and respiration. What drug is a magnesium sulfate antagonist and removes the signs of its overdosage?
*a. Calcium chloride
b. Potassium permanganate
c. Activated charcoal
d. Sodium chloride
e. Potassium chloride
360. A 66-year-old man was given a magnesium sulfate solution intravenously for hypertensive crisis relief. However, his blood pressure did not decrease. After a repeated administration of this medicine he developed inertness, sluggishness, and depressed consciousness and respiration. What drug is a magnesium sulfate antagonist and removes the signs of its overdosage?
a. Potassium chloride
*b. Calcium chloride
c. Sodium chloride
d. Potassium permanganate
e. Activated charcoal
361. A 67-year-old man suffers from cardiac and cerebral atherosclerosis. Examination detected hyperlipidemia. What class of blood plasma lipoproteins contributes the most to the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis?
a. -
*b. Low-density lipoproteins
c. Chylomicrons
d. Alpha-lipoproteins
e. High-density lipoproteins
362. A 67-year-old man suffers from cardiac and cerebral atherosclerosis. Examination detected hyperlipidemia. What class of blood plasma lipoproteins contributes the most to the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis?
a. -
b. High-density lipoproteins
c. Alpha-lipoproteins
*d. Low-density lipoproteins
e. Chylomicrons
363. A 67-year-old man suffers from cardiac and cerebral atherosclerosis. Examination detected hyperlipidemia. What class of blood plasma lipoproteins contributes the most to the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis?
a. Chylomicrons
b. -
*c. Low-density lipoproteins
d. Alpha-lipoproteins
e. High-density lipoproteins
364. A 67-year-old man was delivered to a cardiology department with complaints of periodical pains in his heart, dyspnea caused by even slight exertion, cyanosis and edemas. ECG shows additional excitations of heart ventricles. Name this type of rhythm disturbance:
*a. Extrasystole
b. Flutter
c. Fibrillation
d. Bradycardia
e. Tachycardia
365. A 67-year-old man was delivered to a cardiology department with complaints of periodical pains in his heart, dyspnea caused by even slight exertion, cyanosis and edemas. ECG shows additional excitations of heart ventricles. Name this type of rhythm disturbance:
*a. Extrasystole
b. Flutter
c. Fibrillation
d. Tachycardia
e. Bradycardia
366. A 67-year-old man was delivered to a cardiology department with complaints of periodical pains in his heart, dyspnea caused by even slight exertion, cyanosis and edemas. ECG shows additional excitations of heart ventricles. Name this type of rhythm disturbance:
a. Flutter
b. Tachycardia
c. Fibrillation
d. Bradycardia
*e. Extrasystole
367. A 72-year-old man with hepatocirrhosis developed hepatic coma. Its development is caused by the substances, that are being neutralized in the liver, entering into general circulation through portacaval shunts (portal hypertension syndrome) and necrosis of hepatic cells. What type of  hepatic coma is characterized by these presentations?
a. Ketoacidotic
*b. Mixed
c. Hepatocellular
d. Shunt
e. Parenchymatous
368. A 72-year-old man with hepatocirrhosis developed hepatic coma. Its development is caused by the substances, that are being neutralized in the liver, entering into general circulation through portacaval shunts (portal hypertension syndrome) and necrosis of hepatic cells. What type of  hepatic coma is characterized by these presentations?
a. Ketoacidotic
b. Parenchymatous
c. Shunt
*d. Mixed
e. Hepatocellular
369. A 72-year-old man with hepatocirrhosis developed hepatic coma. Its development is caused by the substances, that are being neutralized in the liver, entering into general circulation through portacaval shunts (portal hypertension syndrome) and necrosis of hepatic cells. What type of  hepatic coma is characterized by these presentations?
a. Parenchymatous
b. Hepatocellular
c. Shunt
*d. Mixed
e. Ketoacidotic
370. A 78-year-old woman during physical exertion suddenly developed abdominal pain accompanied by pallor and a drop in blood pressure to as low as 70/40 mm Hg. Death occurred with signs of acute heart failure. Autopsy detected marked atherosclerosis and a sacculation of vessel wall in the abdominal aorta. The sacculation is 16 cm in diameter and filled with blood clots. In the wall of the sacculation there is a fissured perforation. What pathology occurred in the woman's aorta?
a. -
b. Dysplastic aortic wall
c. Syphilitic mesaortitis
*d. Aortic aneurysm with rupture
e. Nonspecific aortitis
371. A 78-year-old woman during physical exertion suddenly developed abdominal pain accompanied by pallor and a drop in blood pressure to as low as 70/40 mm Hg. Death occurred with signs of acute heart failure. Autopsy detected marked atherosclerosis and a sacculation of vessel wall in the abdominal aorta. The sacculation is 16 cm in diameter and filled with blood clots. In the wall of the sacculation there is a fissured perforation. What pathology occurred in the woman's aorta?
a. -
b. Nonspecific aortitis
c. Dysplastic aortic wall
*d. Aortic aneurysm with rupture
e. Syphilitic mesaortitis
372. A 78-year-old woman during physical exertion suddenly developed abdominal pain accompanied by pallor and a drop in blood pressure to as low as 70/40 mm Hg. Death occurred with signs of acute heart failure. Autopsy detected marked atherosclerosis and a sacculation of vessel wall in the abdominal aorta. The sacculation is 16 cm in diameter and filled with blood clots. In the wall of the sacculation there is a fissured perforation. What pathology occurred in the woman's aorta?
a. -
b. Syphilitic mesaortitis
*c. Aortic aneurysm with rupture
d. Dysplastic aortic wall
e. Nonspecific aortitis
373. A 9-year-old boy is hospitalized in the endocrinology department. He has already had several limb fractures because of fragile bones. What endocrine gland does not function properly in this patient?
a. Adrenal glands
*b. Parathyroid gland
c. Thyroid gland
d. Thymus gland
e. Pineal glands
374. A 9-year-old boy is hospitalized in the endocrinology department. He has already had several limb fractures because of fragile bones. What endocrine gland does not function properly in this patient?
a. Adrenal glands
b. Thyroid gland
c. Thymus gland
*d. Parathyroid gland
e. Pineal glands
375. A 9-year-old boy is hospitalized in the endocrinology department. He has already had several limb fractures because of fragile bones. What endocrine gland does not function properly in this patient?
a. Thyroid gland
b. Thymus gland
c. Adrenal glands
*d. Parathyroid gland
e. Pineal glands
376. A Gram-negative mobile bacillus was obtained from a patient, provisionally diagnosed with typhoid fever. The obtained culture was inoculated onto semiliquid Hiss media for identification. What phenomenon signifies the microbial breakdown of carbohydrates into acid?
a. Gas formation
b. Nutrient medium becomes turbid
c. Precipitation
*d. Indicator changes its color
e. Liquefaction of the medium
377. A Gram-negative mobile bacillus was obtained from a patient, provisionally diagnosed with typhoid fever. The obtained culture was inoculated onto semiliquid Hiss media for identification. What phenomenon signifies the microbial breakdown of carbohydrates into acid?
a. Nutrient medium becomes turbid
b. Gas formation
*c. Indicator changes its color
d. Liquefaction of the medium
e. Precipitation
378. A Gram-negative mobile bacillus was obtained from a patient, provisionally diagnosed with typhoid fever. The obtained culture was inoculated onto semiliquid Hiss media for identification. What phenomenon signifies the microbial breakdown of carbohydrates into acid?
a. Precipitation
*b. Indicator changes its color
c. Gas formation
d. Liquefaction of the medium
e. Nutrient medium becomes turbid
379. A bacteriological laboratory conducts the analysis of potable water quality. Microbial number of the water sample is approximately 100. What microorganisms were accounted for in this case?
a. Human and animal pathogenic bacteria
b. Enteropathogenic bacteria and viruses
*c. All bacteria that have grown on a nutrient medium
d. Opportunistic pathogenic bacteria
e. Colibacilli
380. A bacteriological laboratory conducts the analysis of potable water quality. Microbial number of the water sample is approximately 100. What microorganisms were accounted for in this case?
a. Opportunistic pathogenic bacteria
b. Human and animal pathogenic bacteria
c. Colibacilli
d. Enteropathogenic bacteria and viruses
*e. All bacteria that have grown on a nutrient medium
381. A bacteriological laboratory conducts the analysis of potable water quality. Microbial number of the water sample is approximately 100. What microorganisms were accounted for in this case?
a. Opportunistic pathogenic bacteria
b. Human and animal pathogenic bacteria
c. Enteropathogenic bacteria and viruses
*d. All bacteria that have grown on a nutrient medium
e. Colibacilli
382. A bacteriological laboratory received a sample of dried fish from an outbreak of food poisoning. Inoculation of the sample on Kitt-Tarozzi medium revealed microorganisms resembling tennis racket. These microorganisms are causative agents of the following disease:
*a. Botulism
b. Diphtheria
c. Dysentery
d. Typhoid fever
e. Salmonellosis
383. A bacteriological laboratory received a sample of dried fish from an outbreak of food poisoning. Inoculation of the sample on Kitt-Tarozzi medium revealed microorganisms resembling tennis racket. These microorganisms are causative agents of the following disease:
*a. Botulism
b. Typhoid fever
c. Dysentery
d. Salmonellosis
e. Diphtheria
384. A bacteriological laboratory received a sample of dried fish from an outbreak of food poisoning. Inoculation of the sample on Kitt-Tarozzi medium revealed microorganisms resembling tennis racket. These microorganisms are causative agents of the following disease:
a. Salmonellosis
b. Diphtheria
c. Dysentery
*d. Botulism
e. Typhoid fever
385. A boy has blood group I (I^0 I^0), while his sister has blood group  IV (I^A I^B). What blood groups do their parents have?
a. I (^0 ^0) and III (^ ^0)
b. I (^0 ^0) and IV (I^A I^B)
c. III (^ ^0) and IV (I^A I^B)
*d.  (^ ^0) and III (^ ^0)
e.  (^ ^) and III (^ ^0)
386. A boy has blood group I (I^0 I^0), while his sister has blood group  IV (I^A I^B). What blood groups do their parents have?
a. I (^0 ^0) and IV (I^A I^B)
b. III (^ ^0) and IV (I^A I^B)
c. I (^0 ^0) and III (^ ^0)
d.  (^ ^) and III (^ ^0)
*e.  (^ ^0) and III (^ ^0)
387. A boy has blood group I (I^0 I^0), while his sister has blood group  IV (I^A I^B). What blood groups do their parents have?
a. I (^0 ^0) and IV (I^A I^B)
b.  (^ ^) and III (^ ^0)
c. I (^0 ^0) and III (^ ^0)
*d.  (^ ^0) and III (^ ^0)
e. III (^ ^0) and IV (I^A I^B)
388. A car accident victim presents with a spinal hematoma accompanied by retrosternal pain, tachycardia, and elevated blood pressure. The patient's condition results from the damage to the following segments of the spinal cord:
*a. Th1-Th5
b. S1-S3
c. -
d. C6-C8
e. L1- L3
389. A car accident victim presents with a spinal hematoma accompanied by retrosternal pain, tachycardia, and elevated blood pressure. The patient's condition results from the damage to the following segments of the spinal cord:
a. S1-S3
*b. Th1-Th5
c. C6-C8
d. -
e. L1- L3
390. A car accident victim presents with a spinal hematoma accompanied by retrosternal pain, tachycardia, and elevated blood pressure. The patient's condition results from the damage to the following segments of the spinal cord:
a. S1-S3
b. L1- L3
c. -
d. C6-C8
*e. Th1-Th5
391. A cell is an elementary living system that ensures proper structure, development, functioning, adaptation, procreation, and regeneration of the organism. Name the three main structural components of a cell:
a. Glycocalyx, nucleus, organelles
b. Cell membrane (plasmalemma), inclusions, organelles
c. Cytoplasm, organelles, nucleus
d. Hyaloplasm, plasmalemma, nucleus
*e. Cell membrane (plasmalemma), cytoplasm, nucleus
392. A cell is an elementary living system that ensures proper structure, development, functioning, adaptation, procreation, and regeneration of the organism. Name the three main structural components of a cell:
a. Glycocalyx, nucleus, organelles
b. Cytoplasm, organelles, nucleus
c. Hyaloplasm, plasmalemma, nucleus
*d. Cell membrane (plasmalemma), cytoplasm, nucleus
e. Cell membrane (plasmalemma), inclusions, organelles
393. A cell is an elementary living system that ensures proper structure, development, functioning, adaptation, procreation, and regeneration of the organism. Name the three main structural components of a cell:
a. Hyaloplasm, plasmalemma, nucleus
*b. Cell membrane (plasmalemma), cytoplasm, nucleus
c. Cytoplasm, organelles, nucleus
d. Glycocalyx, nucleus, organelles
e. Cell membrane (plasmalemma), inclusions, organelles
394. A centrifugate of urine sample obtained from a patient with suspected renal tuberculosis was used to make a slide mount for microscopy. What method should be used to stain the slide and detect the causative agent?
a. Aujeszky stain
b. Loeffler stain
*c. Ziehl-Neelsen stain
d. Burri stain
e. Gram stain
395. A centrifugate of urine sample obtained from a patient with suspected renal tuberculosis was used to make a slide mount for microscopy. What method should be used to stain the slide and detect the causative agent?
a. Aujeszky stain
b. Loeffler stain
c. Burri stain
*d. Ziehl-Neelsen stain
e. Gram stain
396. A centrifugate of urine sample obtained from a patient with suspected renal tuberculosis was used to make a slide mount for microscopy. What method should be used to stain the slide and detect the causative agent?
a. Gram stain
*b. Ziehl-Neelsen stain
c. Aujeszky stain
d. Burri stain
e. Loeffler stain
397. A certain antibiotic has low toxicity, relatively rarely causes side effects, and is a reserve antibiotic from the group of macrolides. Its mechanism of action consists of protein synthesis inhibition in bacterial ribosomes by inhibiting the peptide translocase enzyme. What antibiotic is it?
*a. Azithromycin
b. Ampicillin
c. Tetracycline
d. Levomycetin (Chloramphenicol)
e. Sisomicin
398. A certain antibiotic has low toxicity, relatively rarely causes side effects, and is a reserve antibiotic from the group of macrolides. Its mechanism of action consists of protein synthesis inhibition in bacterial ribosomes by inhibiting the peptide translocase enzyme. What antibiotic is it?
a. Tetracycline
b. Ampicillin
*c. Azithromycin
d. Sisomicin
e. Levomycetin (Chloramphenicol)
399. A certain antibiotic has low toxicity, relatively rarely causes side effects, and is a reserve antibiotic from the group of macrolides. Its mechanism of action consists of protein synthesis inhibition in bacterial ribosomes by inhibiting the peptide translocase enzyme. What antibiotic is it?
a. Tetracycline
b. Levomycetin (Chloramphenicol)
c. Ampicillin
d. Sisomicin
*e. Azithromycin
400. A certain disease of infection-allergic or unknown origin leads to bilateral diffuse or focal non-suppurative inflammation of renal glomerular apparatus with characteristic renal and extrarenal signs. Name this disease:
a. Nephrosclerosis
b. Polycystic renal disease
c. Pyelonephritis
*d. Glomerulonephritis
e. Nephrolithiasis
401. A certain disease of infection-allergic or unknown origin leads to bilateral diffuse or focal non-suppurative inflammation of renal glomerular apparatus with characteristic renal and extrarenal signs. Name this disease:
a. Pyelonephritis
b. Nephrosclerosis
c. Polycystic renal disease
d. Nephrolithiasis
*e. Glomerulonephritis
402. A certain disease of infection-allergic or unknown origin leads to bilateral diffuse or focal non-suppurative inflammation of renal glomerular apparatus with characteristic renal and extrarenal signs. Name this disease:
a. Pyelonephritis
b. Polycystic renal disease
c. Nephrosclerosis
d. Nephrolithiasis
*e. Glomerulonephritis
403. A certain drug with potent natriuretic action is usually prescribed for dehydration therapy of cerebral and pulmonary edemas. Name this drug:
a. Etacrynic acid
*b. Furosemide
c. Mannitol
d. Spironolactone
e. Theophylline
404. A certain drug with potent natriuretic action is usually prescribed for dehydration therapy of cerebral and pulmonary edemas. Name this drug:
a. Etacrynic acid
b. Theophylline
c. Spironolactone
d. Mannitol
*e. Furosemide
405. A certain drug with potent natriuretic action is usually prescribed for dehydration therapy of cerebral and pulmonary edemas. Name this drug:
a. Spironolactone
b. Etacrynic acid
*c. Furosemide
d. Mannitol
e. Theophylline
406. A certain embryonic organ is being studied. In this organ the first blood corpuscles that make up blood as a tissue are being formed. Name this organ:
*a. Yolk sac
b. Liver
c. Spleen
d. Red bone marrow
e. Thymus
407. A certain embryonic organ is being studied. In this organ the first blood corpuscles that make up blood as a tissue are being formed. Name this organ:
a. Liver
b. Spleen
c. Red bone marrow
d. Thymus
*e. Yolk sac
408. A certain embryonic organ is being studied. In this organ the first blood corpuscles that make up blood as a tissue are being formed. Name this organ:
a. Thymus
b. Red bone marrow
c. Spleen
*d. Yolk sac
e. Liver
409. A certain enzyme transports functional groups from one substrate to another. What is the class of this enzyme?
a. Ligase
*b. Transferase
c. Hydrolase
d. Isomerase
e. Oxidoreductase
410. A certain enzyme transports functional groups from one substrate to another. What is the class of this enzyme?
a. Ligase
*b. Transferase
c. Oxidoreductase
d. Hydrolase
e. Isomerase
411. A certain enzyme transports functional groups from one substrate to another. What is the class of this enzyme?
a. Oxidoreductase
b. Hydrolase
c. Ligase
d. Isomerase
*e. Transferase
412. A certain hereditary syndrome affects teeth, hair, and bones. Each generation has affected individuals. The syndrome occurs equally frequent in men and women. What type of inheritance is it?
a. Autosomal recessive
b. X-linked dominant
c. X-linked recessive
d. Y-linked
*e. Autosomal dominant
413. A certain hereditary syndrome affects teeth, hair, and bones. Each generation has affected individuals. The syndrome occurs equally frequent in men and women. What type of inheritance is it?
a. Y-linked
b. X-linked dominant
c. X-linked recessive
*d. Autosomal dominant
e. Autosomal recessive
414. A cessation of morphine administration after its long-term use leads to the development of severe mental, neurological, and somatic disorders. Name this condition:
a. Sensitization
b. Idiosyncrasy
c. Tolerance
*d. Withdrawal
e. Cumulation
415. A cessation of morphine administration after its long-term use leads to the development of severe mental, neurological, and somatic disorders. Name this condition:
a. Tolerance
b. Cumulation
c. Idiosyncrasy
d. Sensitization
*e. Withdrawal
416. A cessation of morphine administration after its long-term use leads to the development of severe mental, neurological, and somatic disorders. Name this condition:
a. Tolerance
b. Sensitization
c. Idiosyncrasy
*d. Withdrawal
e. Cumulation
417. A child asked you to blow a balloon as much as you can in one exhale. What air volume will you use for this purpose?
a. Functional residual lung capacity
b. Inspiratory capacity
c. Inspiratory reserve volume
*d. Vital capacity
e. Total lung capacity
418. A child asked you to blow a balloon as much as you can in one exhale. What air volume will you use for this purpose?
a. Total lung capacity
*b. Vital capacity
c. Inspiratory reserve volume
d. Inspiratory capacity
e. Functional residual lung capacity
419. A child asked you to blow a balloon as much as you can in one exhale. What air volume will you use for this purpose?
a. Total lung capacity
b. Inspiratory capacity
c. Inspiratory reserve volume
*d. Vital capacity
e. Functional residual lung capacity
420. A child has a congenital immunodeficiency. The cell-mediated immunity is affected, causing frequent viral infections. It is likely to be caused by a disorder of the following organ:
*a. Thymus gland
b. Red bone marrow
c. Spleen
d. Lymph nodes
e. Palatine tonsils
421. A child has a congenital immunodeficiency. The cell-mediated immunity is affected, causing frequent viral infections. It is likely to be caused by a disorder of the following organ:
a. Lymph nodes
*b. Thymus gland
c. Red bone marrow
d. Palatine tonsils
e. Spleen
422. A child has a congenital immunodeficiency. The cell-mediated immunity is affected, causing frequent viral infections. It is likely to be caused by a disorder of the following organ:
a. Lymph nodes
b. Palatine tonsils
c. Spleen
d. Red bone marrow
*e. Thymus gland
423. A child has a trauma of the lower lip. What muscle is damaged in this case?
a. M. buccinator
*b. M. orbicularis oris
c. M. levator anguli oris
d. M. risorius
e. M. levator labii superioris
424. A child has a trauma of the lower lip. What muscle is damaged in this case?
a. M. buccinator
*b. M. orbicularis oris
c. M. levator labii superioris
d. M. levator anguli oris
e. M. risorius
425. A child has a trauma of the lower lip. What muscle is damaged in this case?
a. M. buccinator
b. M. risorius
*c. M. orbicularis oris
d. M. levator anguli oris
e. M. levator labii superioris
426. A child has been hospitalized with the diagnosis of staphylococcal sepsis. What nutrient medium should be used for inoculation of the patient's blood to isolate the pathogen?
*a. Sugar-peptone broth
b. Bile-salt agar
c. Ploskirev nutrient medium
d. Buchin nutrient medium
e. Meat-peptone agar
427. A child has been hospitalized with the diagnosis of staphylococcal sepsis. What nutrient medium should be used for inoculation of the patient's blood to isolate the pathogen?
*a. Sugar-peptone broth
b. Meat-peptone agar
c. Ploskirev nutrient medium
d. Bile-salt agar
e. Buchin nutrient medium
428. A child has been hospitalized with the diagnosis of staphylococcal sepsis. What nutrient medium should be used for inoculation of the patient's blood to isolate the pathogen?
a. Ploskirev nutrient medium
b. Buchin nutrient medium
c. Meat-peptone agar
d. Bile-salt agar
*e. Sugar-peptone broth
429. A child is diagnosed with a helminthic invasion. What changes in the leukogram should be expected in this case?
a. Increased number of lymphocytes
*b. Increased number of eosinophils
c. Increased number of neutrophils
d. Increased number of monocytes
e. Increased number of erythrocytes
430. A child is diagnosed with a helminthic invasion. What changes in the leukogram should be expected in this case?
a. Increased number of lymphocytes
b. Increased number of monocytes
c. Increased number of erythrocytes
d. Increased number of neutrophils
*e. Increased number of eosinophils
431. A child presents with a wound behind the mastoid bone. Bright red blood streams from the wound. Damage was sustained to the branches of the following artery:
a. A) carotis interna
b. A) maxillaris
c. A) temporalis superior
d. A) carotis externa
*e. A) occipitalis
432. A child presents with a wound behind the mastoid bone. Bright red blood streams from the wound. Damage was sustained to the branches of the following artery:
a. A) carotis interna
b. A) temporalis superior
c. A) maxillaris
d. A) carotis externa
*e. A) occipitalis
433. A child presents with a wound behind the mastoid bone. Bright red blood streams from the wound. Damage was sustained to the branches of the following artery:
a. A) temporalis superior
b. A) carotis interna
c. A) carotis externa
d. A) maxillaris
*e. A) occipitalis
434. A child presents with caries development and disturbed osteogenesis due to an insufficient intake of a certain microelement. Name this microelement:
*a. Fluorine
b. Iodine
c. Cobalt
d. Iron
e. Potassium
435. A child presents with caries development and disturbed osteogenesis due to an insufficient intake of a certain microelement. Name this microelement:
a. Cobalt
*b. Fluorine
c. Iron
d. Iodine
e. Potassium
436. A child presents with caries development and disturbed osteogenesis due to an insufficient intake of a certain microelement. Name this microelement:
a. Iodine
b. Iron
*c. Fluorine
d. Potassium
e. Cobalt
437. A child presents with delayed mental development, delayed growth and formation of the teeth, late development of ossification foci, and low basal metabolic rate. What endocrine gland is functionally insufficient, causing this condition?
a. Gonads
*b. Thyroid gland
c. Pancreas
d. Adrenal glands
e. Neurohypophysis
438. A child presents with delayed mental development, delayed growth and formation of the teeth, late development of ossification foci, and low basal metabolic rate. What endocrine gland is functionally insufficient, causing this condition?
a. Neurohypophysis
b. Adrenal glands
c. Gonads
*d. Thyroid gland
e. Pancreas
439. A child presents with delayed mental development, delayed growth and formation of the teeth, late development of ossification foci, and low basal metabolic rate. What endocrine gland is functionally insufficient, causing this condition?
a. Pancreas
b. Gonads
*c. Thyroid gland
d. Neurohypophysis
e. Adrenal glands
440. A child presents with dry cough. What non-narcotic antitussive drug can relieve the patient's condition?
*a. Glaucine hydrochloride
b. Morphine hydrochloride
c. Potassium iodide
d. Codeine phosphate
e. Althaea officinalis roots
441. A child presents with dry cough. What non-narcotic antitussive drug can relieve the patient's condition?
*a. Glaucine hydrochloride
b. Potassium iodide
c. Althaea officinalis roots
d. Morphine hydrochloride
e. Codeine phosphate
442. A child presents with dry cough. What non-narcotic antitussive drug can relieve the patient's condition?
a. Codeine phosphate
b. Potassium iodide
c. Morphine hydrochloride
d. Althaea officinalis roots
*e. Glaucine hydrochloride
443. A child presents with hepatomegaly, hypoglycemia, and convulsions that occur predominantly during fasting or in stress-inducing situations. The child is diagnosed with von Gierke disease (glycogen storage disease type I). What enzyme is affected by the genetic defect that is the cause of this disease?
*a. Glucose 6-phosphatase
b. Amylo-1,6-glycosidase
c. Glucokinase
d. Phosphoglucomutase
e. Glycogen phosphorylase
444. A child presents with hepatomegaly, hypoglycemia, and convulsions that occur predominantly during fasting or in stress-inducing situations. The child is diagnosed with von Gierke disease (glycogen storage disease type I). What enzyme is affected by the genetic defect that is the cause of this disease?
a. Glucokinase
*b. Glucose 6-phosphatase
c. Glycogen phosphorylase
d. Phosphoglucomutase
e. Amylo-1,6-glycosidase
445. A child presents with hepatomegaly, hypoglycemia, and convulsions that occur predominantly during fasting or in stress-inducing situations. The child is diagnosed with von Gierke disease (glycogen storage disease type I). What enzyme is affected by the genetic defect that is the cause of this disease?
a. Glucokinase
b. Glycogen phosphorylase
c. Phosphoglucomutase
d. Amylo-1,6-glycosidase
*e. Glucose 6-phosphatase
446. A child presents with reduced thyroid function from birth. What pathological condition can develop in this child as a result?
*a. Cretinism
b. Dwarfism
c. Giantism
d. Hypopituitarism
e. Skin hyperpigmentation
447. A child presents with reduced thyroid function from birth. What pathological condition can develop in this child as a result?
a. Giantism
*b. Cretinism
c. Hypopituitarism
d. Dwarfism
e. Skin hyperpigmentation
448. A child was born with numerous maldevelopments: cleft lip and palate, microphthalmia, syndactyly, heart and kidney diseases. The child died at the age of one month. The child's karyotype was 47, 13+. What type of mutation caused this condition?
a. Duplication
b. Translocation
c. Polyploidy
d. Inversion
*e. Trisomy
449. A child was born with numerous maldevelopments: cleft lip and palate, microphthalmia, syndactyly, heart and kidney diseases. The child died at the age of one month. The child's karyotype was 47, 13+. What type of mutation caused this condition?
a. Polyploidy
*b. Trisomy
c. Translocation
d. Duplication
e. Inversion
450. A child was born with numerous maldevelopments: cleft lip and palate, microphthalmia, syndactyly, heart and kidney diseases. The child died at the age of one month. The child's karyotype was 47, 13+. What type of mutation caused this condition?
a. Polyploidy
b. Inversion
c. Translocation
d. Duplication
*e. Trisomy
451. A child was hospitalized with diagnosis of diphtheria. What should be given to this child for specific therapy?
a. Codivac vaccine, sulfanilamides
*b. Diphtheria antitoxin serum, antibiotics
c. Diphtheria bacteriophage
d. Diphtheria vaccines: DPT, DT, diphtheria vaccine
e. Diphtheria anatoxin, antibiotics
452. A child was hospitalized with diagnosis of diphtheria. What should be given to this child for specific therapy?
a. Codivac vaccine, sulfanilamides
*b. Diphtheria antitoxin serum, antibiotics
c. Diphtheria vaccines: DPT, DT, diphtheria vaccine
d. Diphtheria anatoxin, antibiotics
e. Diphtheria bacteriophage
453. A child was hospitalized with diagnosis of diphtheria. What should be given to this child for specific therapy?
a. Diphtheria vaccines: DPT, DT, diphtheria vaccine
b. Diphtheria anatoxin, antibiotics
*c. Diphtheria antitoxin serum, antibiotics
d. Diphtheria bacteriophage
e. Codivac vaccine, sulfanilamides
454. A child with a point mutation presents with absence of glucose 6-phosphatase, hypoglycemia, and hepatomegaly. These signs are characteristic of:
*a. Von Gierke disease (glycogen storage disease type I)
b. Parkinson disease
c. McArdle disease (glycogen storage disease type V)
d. Addison disease (primary adrenal insufficiency)
e. Gaucher disease
455. A child with a point mutation presents with absence of glucose 6-phosphatase, hypoglycemia, and hepatomegaly. These signs are characteristic of:
a. Gaucher disease
b. Parkinson disease
c. Addison disease (primary adrenal insufficiency)
d. McArdle disease (glycogen storage disease type V)
*e. Von Gierke disease (glycogen storage disease type I)
456. A child with a point mutation presents with absence of glucose 6-phosphatase, hypoglycemia, and hepatomegaly. These signs are characteristic of:
a. McArdle disease (glycogen storage disease type V)
b. Parkinson disease
*c. Von Gierke disease (glycogen storage disease type I)
d. Addison disease (primary adrenal insufficiency)
e. Gaucher disease
457. A child with signs of rickets has been prescribed a certain liposoluble vitamin drug by the pediatrician and dentist. This drug affects the metabolism of phosphorus and calcium in the body and facilitates calcium accumulation in bone tissue and dentine. If its content in the body is insufficient, there develop disorders of ossification process, dental structure, and occlusion. Name this drug:
a. Retinol acetate
b. Menadione (Vicasolum)
c. Tocopherol acetate
d. Thyroidin
*e. Ergocalciferol
458. A child with signs of rickets has been prescribed a certain liposoluble vitamin drug by the pediatrician and dentist. This drug affects the metabolism of phosphorus and calcium in the body and facilitates calcium accumulation in bone tissue and dentine. If its content in the body is insufficient, there develop disorders of ossification process, dental structure, and occlusion. Name this drug:
a. Thyroidin
b. Retinol acetate
c. Tocopherol acetate
d. Menadione (Vicasolum)
*e. Ergocalciferol
459. A child with signs of rickets has been prescribed a certain liposoluble vitamin drug by the pediatrician and dentist. This drug affects the metabolism of phosphorus and calcium in the body and facilitates calcium accumulation in bone tissue and dentine. If its content in the body is insufficient, there develop disorders of ossification process, dental structure, and occlusion. Name this drug:
a. Tocopherol acetate
b. Retinol acetate
c. Menadione (Vicasolum)
*d. Ergocalciferol
e. Thyroidin
460. A culture of Gram-positive cocci was isolated from the oral cavity of a clinically healthy 25-year-old person. These cocci have a slightly elongated shape, are arranged in pairs or short chains, form a capsule, and exhibit alpha hemolysis on blood agar. This person is a carrier of the following pathogen:
a. Peptostreptococcus
b. Streptococcus feacalis
c. Streptococcus pyogenes
d. Streptococcus salivarium
*e. Streptococcus pneumoniae
461. A culture of Gram-positive cocci was isolated from the oral cavity of a clinically healthy 25-year-old person. These cocci have a slightly elongated shape, are arranged in pairs or short chains, form a capsule, and exhibit alpha hemolysis on blood agar. This person is a carrier of the following pathogen:
a. Streptococcus pyogenes
*b. Streptococcus pneumoniae
c. Streptococcus salivarium
d. Peptostreptococcus
e. Streptococcus feacalis
462. A culture of Gram-positive cocci was isolated from the oral cavity of a clinically healthy 25-year-old person. These cocci have a slightly elongated shape, are arranged in pairs or short chains, form a capsule, and exhibit alpha hemolysis on blood agar. This person is a carrier of the following pathogen:
a. Streptococcus salivarium
b. Streptococcus pyogenes
c. Streptococcus feacalis
*d. Streptococcus pneumoniae
e. Peptostreptococcus
463. A culture of coccal bacteria was obtained from the oropharynx of a boy with chronic tonsilltits. In the smears these bacteria are arranged in chains. What bacteria are likely in this case?
*a. Streptococci
b. Clostridia
c. Escherichia
d. Staphylococci
e. Vibrio
464. A culture of coccal bacteria was obtained from the oropharynx of a boy with chronic tonsilltits. In the smears these bacteria are arranged in chains. What bacteria are likely in this case?
*a. Streptococci
b. Clostridia
c. Escherichia
d. Vibrio
e. Staphylococci
465. A culture of coccal bacteria was obtained from the oropharynx of a boy with chronic tonsilltits. In the smears these bacteria are arranged in chains. What bacteria are likely in this case?
a. Staphylococci
b. Vibrio
c. Clostridia
d. Escherichia
*e. Streptococci
466. A deciduous second molar was extracted in a 13-year-old child. What permanent tooth will replace the extracted one?
*a. Second premolar
b. Second molar
c. Third molar
d. First premolar
e. First molar
467. A deciduous second molar was extracted in a 13-year-old child. What permanent tooth will replace the extracted one?
a. First molar
*b. Second premolar
c. Second molar
d. First premolar
e. Third molar
468. A deciduous second molar was extracted in a 13-year-old child. What permanent tooth will replace the extracted one?
a. First molar
b. Third molar
*c. Second premolar
d. Second molar
e. First premolar
469. A deletion of the short arm of the 5th chromosome was detected in the somatic cells of an abortive human fetus. Specify the number of autosomes in the karyotype of this organism:
*a. 44
b. 46
c. 48
d. 45
e. 47
470. A deletion of the short arm of the 5th chromosome was detected in the somatic cells of an abortive human fetus. Specify the number of autosomes in the karyotype of this organism:
a. 47
*b. 44
c. 45
d. 48
e. 46
471. A deletion of the short arm of the 5th chromosome was detected in the somatic cells of an abortive human fetus. Specify the number of autosomes in the karyotype of this organism:
a. 48
b. 46
*c. 44
d. 45
e. 47
472. A dental patient was prescribed a psychosedative for his fear of pain. What drug would be the most effective in this case?
*a. Diazepam
b. Aminazine
c. Sodium bromide
d. Lithium carbonate
e. Valerian tincture
473. A dental patient was prescribed a psychosedative for his fear of pain. What drug would be the most effective in this case?
*a. Diazepam
b. Sodium bromide
c. Lithium carbonate
d. Aminazine
e. Valerian tincture
474. A dental patient was prescribed a psychosedative for his fear of pain. What drug would be the most effective in this case?
a. Aminazine
b. Sodium bromide
*c. Diazepam
d. Lithium carbonate
e. Valerian tincture
475. A dental plaque swab was stained using the Burri-Gins technique. Microscopy of the swab revealed red cells of microorganisms against a dark brown background, with some of the bacteria surrounded by a light halo. What structure of the microorganisms was detected?
*a. Capsule
b. Peptidoglycan layer
c. Outer membrane
d. Exoenzymes attached to the cell wall
e. Protoplast
476. A dental plaque swab was stained using the Burri-Gins technique. Microscopy of the swab revealed red cells of microorganisms against a dark brown background, with some of the bacteria surrounded by a light halo. What structure of the microorganisms was detected?
a. Exoenzymes attached to the cell wall
*b. Capsule
c. Protoplast
d. Peptidoglycan layer
e. Outer membrane
477. A dental plaque swab was stained using the Burri-Gins technique. Microscopy of the swab revealed red cells of microorganisms against a dark brown background, with some of the bacteria surrounded by a light halo. What structure of the microorganisms was detected?
a. Outer membrane
b. Exoenzymes attached to the cell wall
c. Protoplast
*d. Capsule
e. Peptidoglycan layer
478. A dental surgeon has diagnosed a 24-year-old woman with suppurative inflammation of the sphenoidal sinus. All possible measures are taken to prevent the artery wall from being involved in this process. The artery is located in the cavernous sinus and its involvement can cause fatal hemorrhage. Name this artery:
a. A) infraraorbitalis
b. F. supraorbitalis
*c. A) carotis interna
d. A) ophthalmica
e. A) carotis externa
479. A dental surgeon has diagnosed a 24-year-old woman with suppurative inflammation of the sphenoidal sinus. All possible measures are taken to prevent the artery wall from being involved in this process. The artery is located in the cavernous sinus and its involvement can cause fatal hemorrhage. Name this artery:
a. A) ophthalmica
b. A) carotis externa
*c. A) carotis interna
d. F. supraorbitalis
e. A) infraraorbitalis
480. A dental surgeon has diagnosed a 24-year-old woman with suppurative inflammation of the sphenoidal sinus. All possible measures are taken to prevent the artery wall from being involved in this process. The artery is located in the cavernous sinus and its involvement can cause fatal hemorrhage. Name this artery:
a. F. supraorbitalis
b. A) infraraorbitalis
c. A) ophthalmica
*d. A) carotis interna
e. A) carotis externa
481. A dentist administers anesthesia in the area of the upper second molar. What nerves does the doctor anesthetize?
a. Rr. alveolares inferiores posteriores
*b. Rr. alveolares superiores posteriores
c. Rr. alveolares superiores medii
d. Rr. alveolares superiores anteriores
e. Rr. alveolares inferiores anteriores
482. A dentist administers anesthesia in the area of the upper second molar. What nerves does the doctor anesthetize?
a. Rr. alveolares inferiores posteriores
b. Rr. alveolares superiores anteriores
c. Rr. alveolares inferiores anteriores
d. Rr. alveolares superiores medii
*e. Rr. alveolares superiores posteriores
483. A dentist administers anesthesia in the area of the upper second molar. What nerves does the doctor anesthetize?
a. Rr. alveolares superiores anteriores
b. Rr. alveolares superiores medii
c. Rr. alveolares inferiores anteriores
d. Rr. alveolares inferiores posteriores
*e. Rr. alveolares superiores posteriores
484. A dentist has found an ulcer on the oral mucosa of a 7-year-old girl. The ulcer is 1.5 cm in diameter, it has uneven edges and a gray floor. After the ulcer scrape was stained using the Ziel-Nielsen technique, thin ruby-red bacilli were detected in the slide. The bacilli are isolated or arranged in chaotic clusters. This pathogen is characteristic of the following disease:
*a. Tuberculosis
b. Actinomycosis
c. Diphtheria
d. Syphilis
e. Candidiasis
485. A dentist has found an ulcer on the oral mucosa of a 7-year-old girl. The ulcer is 1.5 cm in diameter, it has uneven edges and a gray floor. After the ulcer scrape was stained using the Ziel-Nielsen technique, thin ruby-red bacilli were detected in the slide. The bacilli are isolated or arranged in chaotic clusters. This pathogen is characteristic of the following disease:
a. Actinomycosis
b. Syphilis
c. Candidiasis
*d. Tuberculosis
e. Diphtheria
486. A dentist has found an ulcer on the oral mucosa of a 7-year-old girl. The ulcer is 1.5 cm in diameter, it has uneven edges and a gray floor. After the ulcer scrape was stained using the Ziel-Nielsen technique, thin ruby-red bacilli were detected in the slide. The bacilli are isolated or arranged in chaotic clusters. This pathogen is characteristic of the following disease:
a. Candidiasis
b. Syphilis
c. Diphtheria
d. Actinomycosis
*e. Tuberculosis
487. A dentist has to spend much of his time on his feet when working, which can result in a venous congestion in the legs and varicose veins. Leading mechanism of congestion in this case is the decrease of:
*a. Skeletal muscle contraction in the lower limbs
b. Blood pressure gradient in the veins
c. Cardiac residual pumping force
d. Diaphragmatic piston effect on the abdominal organs
e. Thoracic pump effect
488. A dentist has to spend much of his time on his feet when working, which can result in a venous congestion in the legs and varicose veins. Leading mechanism of congestion in this case is the decrease of:
*a. Skeletal muscle contraction in the lower limbs
b. Diaphragmatic piston effect on the abdominal organs
c. Thoracic pump effect
d. Blood pressure gradient in the veins
e. Cardiac residual pumping force
489. A dentist has to spend much of his time on his feet when working, which can result in a venous congestion in the legs and varicose veins. Leading mechanism of congestion in this case is the decrease of:
a. Diaphragmatic piston effect on the abdominal organs
b. Cardiac residual pumping force
c. Thoracic pump effect
d. Blood pressure gradient in the veins
*e. Skeletal muscle contraction in the lower limbs
490. A dentist prescribed the patient with maxillofacial arthritis diclofenac sodium. What is the mechanism of action of this drug?
a. Catalase inhibition
*b. Cyclooxygenase-2 inhibition
c. Phosphodiesterase activation
d. Opiate receptors activation
e. Opiate receptors block
491. A dentist prescribed the patient with maxillofacial arthritis diclofenac sodium. What is the mechanism of action of this drug?
a. Catalase inhibition
b. Phosphodiesterase activation
c. Opiate receptors block
*d. Cyclooxygenase-2 inhibition
e. Opiate receptors activation
492. A dentist prescribed the patient with maxillofacial arthritis diclofenac sodium. What is the mechanism of action of this drug?
a. Phosphodiesterase activation
b. Catalase inhibition
c. Opiate receptors block
*d. Cyclooxygenase-2 inhibition
e. Opiate receptors activation
493. A dentist used a solution of potassium permanganate as an antiseptic. This preparation has a bactericidal effect because of:
*a. Atomic oxygen
b. Potassium oxide
c. Potassium
d. Potassium hydroxide
e. Manganese oxide
494. A dentist used a solution of potassium permanganate as an antiseptic. This preparation has a bactericidal effect because of:
a. Manganese oxide
b. Potassium hydroxide
c. Potassium oxide
*d. Atomic oxygen
e. Potassium
495. A dentist used a solution of potassium permanganate as an antiseptic. This preparation has a bactericidal effect because of:
a. Potassium hydroxide
b. Potassium
*c. Atomic oxygen
d. Potassium oxide
e. Manganese oxide
496. A dentist was hospitalized into the infectious diseases unit with complaints of nausea, appetite loss, icteric sclerae, and subcostal pain on the right. Laboratory analysis confirmed the diagnosis of viral hepatitis, type B) What infection transmission route is the most likely in this case?
*a. Parenteral
b. Vector-borne
c. Airborne dust particles
d. Alimentary
e. Airborne droplets
497. A dentist was hospitalized into the infectious diseases unit with complaints of nausea, appetite loss, icteric sclerae, and subcostal pain on the right. Laboratory analysis confirmed the diagnosis of viral hepatitis, type B) What infection transmission route is the most likely in this case?
a. Airborne droplets
b. Vector-borne
c. Alimentary
*d. Parenteral
e. Airborne dust particles
498. A dentist was hospitalized into the infectious diseases unit with complaints of nausea, appetite loss, icteric sclerae, and subcostal pain on the right. Laboratory analysis confirmed the diagnosis of viral hepatitis, type B) What infection transmission route is the most likely in this case?
a. Airborne dust particles
b. Airborne droplets
c. Vector-borne
*d. Parenteral
e. Alimentary
499. A diabetus mellitus patient developed unconsciousness and convulsions after administration of insulin. What result of blood glucose analysis is the most likely in this case?
a. 8 mmol/L
b. 10 mmol/L
c. 3.3 mmol/L
*d. 1.5 mmol/L
e. 5.5 mmol/L
500. A diabetus mellitus patient developed unconsciousness and convulsions after administration of insulin. What result of blood glucose analysis is the most likely in this case?
a. 8 mmol/L
b. 10 mmol/L
c. 3.3 mmol/L
d. 5.5 mmol/L
*e. 1.5 mmol/L
501. A diabetus mellitus patient developed unconsciousness and convulsions after administration of insulin. What result of blood glucose analysis is the most likely in this case?
a. 8 mmol/L
b. 3.3 mmol/L
*c. 1.5 mmol/L
d. 5.5 mmol/L
e. 10 mmol/L
502. A diver that submerged to the depth of 75 meters detected signs of CNS functional disturbance: excitation, lapse of concentration, euphoria leading to professional errors. What substance has toxic effect on the neurons, thus leading to the development of these signs?
a. Ammonia
b. Carbon dioxide
c. Lactate
d. Oxygen
*e. Nitrogen
503. A diver that submerged to the depth of 75 meters detected signs of CNS functional disturbance: excitation, lapse of concentration, euphoria leading to professional errors. What substance has toxic effect on the neurons, thus leading to the development of these signs?
a. Ammonia
b. Carbon dioxide
c. Oxygen
d. Lactate
*e. Nitrogen
504. A diver that submerged to the depth of 75 meters detected signs of CNS functional disturbance: excitation, lapse of concentration, euphoria leading to professional errors. What substance has toxic effect on the neurons, thus leading to the development of these signs?
a. Carbon dioxide
b. Oxygen
c. Lactate
d. Ammonia
*e. Nitrogen
505. A doctor diagnosed a patient with meningococcal nasopharyngitis. What method of laboratory diagnostics would be a rational choice for confirmation of the diagnosis?
*a. Bacteriology
b. Biological method
c. Serology
d. Microscopy
e. Allergy testing
506. A doctor diagnosed a patient with meningococcal nasopharyngitis. What method of laboratory diagnostics would be a rational choice for confirmation of the diagnosis?
a. Allergy testing
b. Microscopy
c. Serology
*d. Bacteriology
e. Biological method
507. A doctor diagnosed a patient with meningococcal nasopharyngitis. What method of laboratory diagnostics would be a rational choice for confirmation of the diagnosis?
a. Microscopy
b. Biological method
c. Allergy testing
*d. Bacteriology
e. Serology
508. A doctor discusses with colleagues a new antiepileptic drug --- sodium valproate. What is the likely mechanism of action of this drug?
*a. Inhibition of GABA transferase enzyme activity
b. Stimulation of GABA transferase enzyme activity
c. Stimulation of Ca^2+ -dependent ATPase activity
d. Inhibition of monoamine oxidase
e. Inhibition of Ca^2+ -dependent ATPase activity
509. A doctor discusses with colleagues a new antiepileptic drug --- sodium valproate. What is the likely mechanism of action of this drug?
a. Stimulation of GABA transferase enzyme activity
b. Inhibition of Ca^2+ -dependent ATPase activity
c. Inhibition of monoamine oxidase
*d. Inhibition of GABA transferase enzyme activity
e. Stimulation of Ca^2+ -dependent ATPase activity
510. A doctor discusses with colleagues a new antiepileptic drug --- sodium valproate. What is the likely mechanism of action of this drug?
a. Stimulation of GABA transferase enzyme activity
b. Inhibition of Ca^2+ -dependent ATPase activity
c. Inhibition of monoamine oxidase
d. Stimulation of Ca^2+ -dependent ATPase activity
*e. Inhibition of GABA transferase enzyme activity
511. A doctor has detected an inflammation of the patient's oral mucosa, accompanied by excruciating pain. What nerve is affected in this case?
*a. Trigeminal nerve
b. Facial nerve
c. Chorda tympani
d. Vagus nerve
e. Glossopharyngeal nerve
512. A doctor has detected an inflammation of the patient's oral mucosa, accompanied by excruciating pain. What nerve is affected in this case?
*a. Trigeminal nerve
b. Glossopharyngeal nerve
c. Chorda tympani
d. Facial nerve
e. Vagus nerve
513. A doctor has detected an inflammation of the patient's oral mucosa, accompanied by excruciating pain. What nerve is affected in this case?
a. Facial nerve
b. Glossopharyngeal nerve
c. Vagus nerve
*d. Trigeminal nerve
e. Chorda tympani
514. A doctor has made a diagnosis of gingivitis and recommended the patient to rinse the oral cavity with an oxidizing agent. Specify this agent:
*a. Hydrogen peroxide
b. Brilliant green
c. Phenol
d. Boric acid
e. Salicylic acid
515. A doctor has made a diagnosis of gingivitis and recommended the patient to rinse the oral cavity with an oxidizing agent. Specify this agent:
a. Brilliant green
*b. Hydrogen peroxide
c. Phenol
d. Salicylic acid
e. Boric acid
516. A doctor has made a diagnosis of gingivitis and recommended the patient to rinse the oral cavity with an oxidizing agent. Specify this agent:
a. Salicylic acid
*b. Hydrogen peroxide
c. Boric acid
d. Brilliant green
e. Phenol
517. A fixed-run taxi passenger has a severe attack of tachycardia. A doctor travelling by the same taxi has managed to slow down his heart rate by pressing upon the eyeballs and thus inducing the following reflex:
a. Hering-Breuer reflex
b. Frank-Starling mechanism
*c. Aschner-Dagnini reflex
d. Bainbridge reflex
e. Holtz reflex
518. A fixed-run taxi passenger has a severe attack of tachycardia. A doctor travelling by the same taxi has managed to slow down his heart rate by pressing upon the eyeballs and thus inducing the following reflex:
a. Hering-Breuer reflex
b. Holtz reflex
c. Bainbridge reflex
*d. Aschner-Dagnini reflex
e. Frank-Starling mechanism
519. A fixed-run taxi passenger has a severe attack of tachycardia. A doctor travelling by the same taxi has managed to slow down his heart rate by pressing upon the eyeballs and thus inducing the following reflex:
a. Holtz reflex
b. Hering-Breuer reflex
c. Bainbridge reflex
d. Frank-Starling mechanism
*e. Aschner-Dagnini reflex
520. A girl presents with high fever and sore throat. Objectively the soft palate is swollen, the tonsils are covered with gray films that are firmly attached and leave deep bleeding lesions when removed. What is the most likely disease in this case?
*a. Pharyngeal diphtheria
b. Infectious mononucleosis
c. Lacunar tonsillitis
d. Necrotic tonsillitis
e. Pseudomembranous (Vincent's) tonsillitis
521. A girl presents with high fever and sore throat. Objectively the soft palate is swollen, the tonsils are covered with gray films that are firmly attached and leave deep bleeding lesions when removed. What is the most likely disease in this case?
a. Necrotic tonsillitis
b. Infectious mononucleosis
c. Pseudomembranous (Vincent's) tonsillitis
d. Lacunar tonsillitis
*e. Pharyngeal diphtheria
522. A girl presents with high fever and sore throat. Objectively the soft palate is swollen, the tonsils are covered with gray films that are firmly attached and leave deep bleeding lesions when removed. What is the most likely disease in this case?
a. Pseudomembranous (Vincent's) tonsillitis
b. Infectious mononucleosis
*c. Pharyngeal diphtheria
d. Lacunar tonsillitis
e. Necrotic tonsillitis
523. A group of men came to a doctor with complaints of fever, headache, muscle pain, and swollen eyelids and face. These men are hunters and eat meat of wild animals. What disease can be characterized by these signs?
*a. Trichinosis
b. Cysticercosis
c. Taenia solium invasion
d. Filariasis
e. Taenia saginata invasion
524. A group of men came to a doctor with complaints of fever, headache, muscle pain, and swollen eyelids and face. These men are hunters and eat meat of wild animals. What disease can be characterized by these signs?
a. Filariasis
b. Cysticercosis
c. Taenia saginata invasion
*d. Trichinosis
e. Taenia solium invasion
525. A group of men came to a doctor with complaints of fever, headache, muscle pain, and swollen eyelids and face. These men are hunters and eat meat of wild animals. What disease can be characterized by these signs?
a. Taenia saginata invasion
b. Filariasis
*c. Trichinosis
d. Cysticercosis
e. Taenia solium invasion
526. A group of people came to a hospital complaining of weakness, intestinal pain, and indigestion. Their stool tests detected cysts with four nuclei that are characteristic of the following protozoon:
*a. Entamoeba histolytica
b. Entamoeba gingivalis
c. Entamoeba coli
d. Giardia
e. Balantidium coli
527. A group of people came to a hospital complaining of weakness, intestinal pain, and indigestion. Their stool tests detected cysts with four nuclei that are characteristic of the following protozoon:
a. Giardia
b. Balantidium coli
*c. Entamoeba histolytica
d. Entamoeba coli
e. Entamoeba gingivalis
528. A group of people came to a hospital complaining of weakness, intestinal pain, and indigestion. Their stool tests detected cysts with four nuclei that are characteristic of the following protozoon:
a. Giardia
b. Entamoeba coli
c. Entamoeba gingivalis
*d. Entamoeba histolytica
e. Balantidium coli
529. A histological slide shows a hematopoietic organ that consists of lobes of varying shape. Each lobe has its cortical and medullary substances. Such structure is characteristic of the following organ:
a. Lymph node
b. Spleen
*c. Thymus
d. Vermiform appendix
e. Tonsils
530. A histological slide shows a hematopoietic organ that consists of lobes of varying shape. Each lobe has its cortical and medullary substances. Such structure is characteristic of the following organ:
a. Lymph node
b. Spleen
c. Vermiform appendix
*d. Thymus
e. Tonsils
531. A histological slide shows a hematopoietic organ that consists of lobes of varying shape. Each lobe has its cortical and medullary substances. Such structure is characteristic of the following organ:
a. Lymph node
b. Vermiform appendix
*c. Thymus
d. Spleen
e. Tonsils
532. A histological specimen of decalcified lower jaw shows bundles of thick collagen fibers around the root of a tooth. Between these fibers, loose fibrous connective tissue with blood vessels can be identified. What structure is it?
*a. Periodontium
b. Gums
c. Dental alveolus
d. Dentin
e. Cellular cementum
533. A histological specimen of decalcified lower jaw shows bundles of thick collagen fibers around the root of a tooth. Between these fibers, loose fibrous connective tissue with blood vessels can be identified. What structure is it?
a. Gums
b. Cellular cementum
c. Dental alveolus
d. Dentin
*e. Periodontium
534. A histological specimen of decalcified lower jaw shows bundles of thick collagen fibers around the root of a tooth. Between these fibers, loose fibrous connective tissue with blood vessels can be identified. What structure is it?
a. Gums
b. Cellular cementum
c. Dentin
d. Dental alveolus
*e. Periodontium
535. A histological specimen of mucous tunic of a certain organ shows stratified epithelium consisting of 20-25 cellular layers with squamous superficial cells. Name the organ from which this sample was obtained:
*a. Esophagus
b. Small intestine
c. Duodenum
d. Gastric fundus
e. Large intestine
536. A histological specimen of mucous tunic of a certain organ shows stratified epithelium consisting of 20-25 cellular layers with squamous superficial cells. Name the organ from which this sample was obtained:
a. Duodenum
b. Gastric fundus
c. Large intestine
*d. Esophagus
e. Small intestine
537. A histological specimen of mucous tunic of a certain organ shows stratified epithelium consisting of 20-25 cellular layers with squamous superficial cells. Name the organ from which this sample was obtained:
a. Large intestine
b. Duodenum
c. Small intestine
d. Gastric fundus
*e. Esophagus
538. A histological specimen of the heart wall shows large cells with light-colored cytoplasm and an eccentric nucleus, located between the endocardium and the myocardium. What cardiac cells have such morphological features?
*a. Purkinje cells
b. Contractile cardiomyocytes
c. Endocrine cells
d. Lipocytes
e. Pacemaker cells
539. A histological specimen of the heart wall shows large cells with light-colored cytoplasm and an eccentric nucleus, located between the endocardium and the myocardium. What cardiac cells have such morphological features?
*a. Purkinje cells
b. Contractile cardiomyocytes
c. Pacemaker cells
d. Endocrine cells
e. Lipocytes
540. A histological specimen of the heart wall shows large cells with light-colored cytoplasm and an eccentric nucleus, located between the endocardium and the myocardium. What cardiac cells have such morphological features?
*a. Purkinje cells
b. Endocrine cells
c. Pacemaker cells
d. Contractile cardiomyocytes
e. Lipocytes
541. A histological specimen shows cells that form isogenous groups. There are glycoproteins, proteoglycans, and collagen fibers in the intercellular substance. What tissue is it?
*a. Cartilaginous tissue
b. Brown adipose tissue
c. Bone tissue
d. Mucous tissue
e. White adipose tissue
542. A histological specimen shows cells that form isogenous groups. There are glycoproteins, proteoglycans, and collagen fibers in the intercellular substance. What tissue is it?
a. Mucous tissue
b. Brown adipose tissue
c. White adipose tissue
d. Bone tissue
*e. Cartilaginous tissue
543. A histological specimen shows cells that form isogenous groups. There are glycoproteins, proteoglycans, and collagen fibers in the intercellular substance. What tissue is it?
a. White adipose tissue
b. Mucous tissue
c. Brown adipose tissue
d. Bone tissue
*e. Cartilaginous tissue
544. A histological specimen shows terminal secretory parts of glands made of conic cells with basophilic cytoplasm and a roundish nucleus in the centre. Specify the type of terminal secretory parts by the type of secretion:
*a. Serous
b. Combined
c. Mucous
d. Seromucous
e. Sebaceous
545. A histological specimen shows terminal secretory parts of glands made of conic cells with basophilic cytoplasm and a roundish nucleus in the centre. Specify the type of terminal secretory parts by the type of secretion:
a. Combined
b. Seromucous
c. Mucous
*d. Serous
e. Sebaceous
546. A histological specimen shows terminal secretory parts of glands made of conic cells with basophilic cytoplasm and a roundish nucleus in the centre. Specify the type of terminal secretory parts by the type of secretion:
a. Mucous
*b. Serous
c. Combined
d. Sebaceous
e. Seromucous
547. A histological specimen shows three neurons: pseudounipolar, bipolar, and multipolar. How many axons will each of these cell have?
a. None
*b. One
c. Many
d. Three
e. Two
548. A histological specimen shows three neurons: pseudounipolar, bipolar, and multipolar. How many axons will each of these cell have?
a. Two
*b. One
c. Many
d. None
e. Three
549. A histological specimen shows three neurons: pseudounipolar, bipolar, and multipolar. How many axons will each of these cell have?
a. Two
b. Many
c. None
d. Three
*e. One
550. A histology slide of the heading end of an embryo at 5 weeks of gestation shows pharyngeal arches. What develops from the first pair of these structures?
*a. Mandibular and maxillary processes
b. Mandibular processes
c. Maxillary processes
d. Thyroid cartilage
e. External auditory meatus
551. A histology slide of the heading end of an embryo at 5 weeks of gestation shows pharyngeal arches. What develops from the first pair of these structures?
*a. Mandibular and maxillary processes
b. Maxillary processes
c. Mandibular processes
d. External auditory meatus
e. Thyroid cartilage
552. A histology slide of the heading end of an embryo at 5 weeks of gestation shows pharyngeal arches. What develops from the first pair of these structures?
a. Thyroid cartilage
b. Maxillary processes
c. Mandibular processes
*d. Mandibular and maxillary processes
e. External auditory meatus
553. A histology slide with a section of a dental crown shows a small number of radially positioned collagen fibers (Korff fibers) in the intercellular substance of dentin. What layer of dentin is it?
a. Granular layer
b. Predentin
*c. Mantle dentin
d. Interglobular dentin
e. Parapulpar dentin
554. A histology slide with a section of a dental crown shows a small number of radially positioned collagen fibers (Korff fibers) in the intercellular substance of dentin. What layer of dentin is it?
a. Interglobular dentin
*b. Mantle dentin
c. Granular layer
d. Parapulpar dentin
e. Predentin
555. A histology slide with a section of a dental crown shows a small number of radially positioned collagen fibers (Korff fibers) in the intercellular substance of dentin. What layer of dentin is it?
a. Interglobular dentin
b. Granular layer
c. Parapulpar dentin
d. Predentin
*e. Mantle dentin
556. A histopathological analysis of the tissues of an extracted tooth shows that a larger part of the dental cavity is filled with the collagen fiber-rich connective tissue and cellular infiltrations that are made up of lymphocytes and plasma cells. What type of pulpitis can be characterized by the described changes?
*a. Fibrous pulpitis
b. -
c. Gangrenous pulpitis
d. Granulating pulpitis
e. Purulent pulpitis
557. A histopathological analysis of the tissues of an extracted tooth shows that a larger part of the dental cavity is filled with the collagen fiber-rich connective tissue and cellular infiltrations that are made up of lymphocytes and plasma cells. What type of pulpitis can be characterized by the described changes?
a. -
*b. Fibrous pulpitis
c. Purulent pulpitis
d. Gangrenous pulpitis
e. Granulating pulpitis
558. A histopathological analysis of the tissues of an extracted tooth shows that a larger part of the dental cavity is filled with the collagen fiber-rich connective tissue and cellular infiltrations that are made up of lymphocytes and plasma cells. What type of pulpitis can be characterized by the described changes?
a. Gangrenous pulpitis
*b. Fibrous pulpitis
c. Purulent pulpitis
d. Granulating pulpitis
e. -
559. A hospitalized person needs catheterization of the subclavian vein. In what topographical anatomical region must the puncture be performed for this purpose?
a. Spatium interscalenum
b. Trigonum omotracheale
c. Trigonum caroticum
d. Incisura jugularis
*e. Spatium antescalenum
560. A hospitalized person needs catheterization of the subclavian vein. In what topographical anatomical region must the puncture be performed for this purpose?
a. Trigonum omotracheale
*b. Spatium antescalenum
c. Trigonum caroticum
d. Incisura jugularis
e. Spatium interscalenum
561. A hospitalized person needs catheterization of the subclavian vein. In what topographical anatomical region must the puncture be performed for this purpose?
a. Trigonum omotracheale
b. Incisura jugularis
*c. Spatium antescalenum
d. Spatium interscalenum
e. Trigonum caroticum
562. A human embryo unattached to the endometrium was detected in the uterine cavity. What stage of embryo development is it?
a. Gastrula
b. Morula
c. Zygote
*d. Blastocyst
e. Neurula
563. A human embryo unattached to the endometrium was detected in the uterine cavity. What stage of embryo development is it?
a. Morula
*b. Blastocyst
c. Gastrula
d. Neurula
e. Zygote
564. A human embryo unattached to the endometrium was detected in the uterine cavity. What stage of embryo development is it?
a. Morula
b. Gastrula
*c. Blastocyst
d. Zygote
e. Neurula
565. A hunter was drinking raw water from a pond. He risks infection with the following type of trematodiasis:
*a. Fascioliasis
b. Dicroceliasis
c. Clonorchiasis
d. Paragonimiasis
e. Opisthorchiasis
566. A hunter was drinking raw water from a pond. He risks infection with the following type of trematodiasis:
*a. Fascioliasis
b. Paragonimiasis
c. Dicroceliasis
d. Clonorchiasis
e. Opisthorchiasis
567. A hunter was drinking raw water from a pond. He risks infection with the following type of trematodiasis:
*a. Fascioliasis
b. Paragonimiasis
c. Opisthorchiasis
d. Dicroceliasis
e. Clonorchiasis
568. A lab rat received a subcutaneous injection of mercury(II) chloride in the dosage of 5 mg per 1 kg of body mass. 24 hours later, the creatinine levels in the animal's blood plasma increased several times. What mechanism of retention azotemia is observed in this case?
*a. Decreased glomerular filtration
b. Increased creatinine secretion in the renal tubules
c. Increased creatinine reabsorption
d. Increased glomerular filtration
e. Increased creatinine production in the muscles
569. A lab rat received a subcutaneous injection of mercury(II) chloride in the dosage of 5 mg per 1 kg of body mass. 24 hours later, the creatinine levels in the animal's blood plasma increased several times. What mechanism of retention azotemia is observed in this case?
*a. Decreased glomerular filtration
b. Increased glomerular filtration
c. Increased creatinine production in the muscles
d. Increased creatinine secretion in the renal tubules
e. Increased creatinine reabsorption
570. A lab rat received a subcutaneous injection of mercury(II) chloride in the dosage of 5 mg per 1 kg of body mass. 24 hours later, the creatinine levels in the animal's blood plasma increased several times. What mechanism of retention azotemia is observed in this case?
a. Increased glomerular filtration
b. Increased creatinine production in the muscles
c. Increased creatinine reabsorption
d. Increased creatinine secretion in the renal tubules
*e. Decreased glomerular filtration
571. A lancelet embryo is at the developmental stage during which its cells multiply, while its general volume remains practically unchanged. What developmental stage is it?
a. Histogenesis
*b. Cleavage
c. Gastrulation
d. Organogenesis
e. Neurulation
572. A lancelet embryo is at the developmental stage during which its cells multiply, while its general volume remains practically unchanged. What developmental stage is it?
a. Histogenesis
*b. Cleavage
c. Organogenesis
d. Gastrulation
e. Neurulation
573. A lancelet embryo is at the developmental stage during which its cells multiply, while its general volume remains practically unchanged. What developmental stage is it?
a. Organogenesis
b. Histogenesis
c. Neurulation
d. Gastrulation
*e. Cleavage
574. A man after a traffic accident was brought in a severe condition to the intensive care unit. The patient's condition can be described as a severe pathologic process accompanied by exhaustion of vital functions that brings the body to the brink of death due to critical decrease of capillary circulation in the affected organs. Name the patient's condition:
*a. Shock
b. Agony
c. Collapse
d. Coma
e. Preagony
575. A man after a traffic accident was brought in a severe condition to the intensive care unit. The patient's condition can be described as a severe pathologic process accompanied by exhaustion of vital functions that brings the body to the brink of death due to critical decrease of capillary circulation in the affected organs. Name the patient's condition:
a. Collapse
b. Coma
c. Agony
d. Preagony
*e. Shock
576. A man after a traffic accident was brought in a severe condition to the intensive care unit. The patient's condition can be described as a severe pathologic process accompanied by exhaustion of vital functions that brings the body to the brink of death due to critical decrease of capillary circulation in the affected organs. Name the patient's condition:
a. Coma
b. Agony
c. Preagony
*d. Shock
e. Collapse
577. A man came to a dentist with complaints of pain during chewing and moving the jaw forward. What masticatory muscles are inflamed in this case?
*a. M.m. pterigoidei laterales
b. -
c. M.m. temporales
d. M.m. buccalis
e. M.m. pterigoidei mediales
578. A man came to a dentist with complaints of pain during chewing and moving the jaw forward. What masticatory muscles are inflamed in this case?
*a. M.m. pterigoidei laterales
b. M.m. temporales
c. -
d. M.m. buccalis
e. M.m. pterigoidei mediales
579. A man came to a dentist with complaints of pain during chewing and moving the jaw forward. What masticatory muscles are inflamed in this case?
a. M.m. temporales
*b. M.m. pterigoidei laterales
c. M.m. buccalis
d. M.m. pterigoidei mediales
e. -
580. A man came to a dentist with complaints of pain, redness, and swelling of the gums. He was provisionally diagnosed with herpetic gingivostomatitis. What virus can cause this disease?
a. Cytomegalovirus
b. Epstein-Barr virus
*c. Herpes simplex virus, type 1
d. Herpes simplex virus, type 2
e. Herpes zoster virus
581. A man came to a dentist with complaints of pain, redness, and swelling of the gums. He was provisionally diagnosed with herpetic gingivostomatitis. What virus can cause this disease?
a. Cytomegalovirus
b. Epstein-Barr virus
c. Herpes zoster virus
*d. Herpes simplex virus, type 1
e. Herpes simplex virus, type 2
582. A man came to a dentist with complaints of pain, redness, and swelling of the gums. He was provisionally diagnosed with herpetic gingivostomatitis. What virus can cause this disease?
a. Herpes simplex virus, type 2
b. Herpes zoster virus
c. Epstein-Barr virus
d. Cytomegalovirus
*e. Herpes simplex virus, type 1
583. A man came to a doctor with complaints of excessive thirst (polydipsia) and frequent urination with a large amount of urine (polyuria). The patient's history states that 4 weeks ago he was diagnosed with necrosis of the posterior lobe of the pituitary gland caused by a craniocerebral injury. What pathology is observed in the patient?
*a. Diabetes insipidus
b. Acromegaly
c. Diabetes mellitus
d. Cushing disease
e. Cushing syndrome
584. A man came to a doctor with complaints of excessive thirst (polydipsia) and frequent urination with a large amount of urine (polyuria). The patient's history states that 4 weeks ago he was diagnosed with necrosis of the posterior lobe of the pituitary gland caused by a craniocerebral injury. What pathology is observed in the patient?
*a. Diabetes insipidus
b. Cushing disease
c. Cushing syndrome
d. Diabetes mellitus
e. Acromegaly
585. A man came to a doctor with complaints of excessive thirst (polydipsia) and frequent urination with a large amount of urine (polyuria). The patient's history states that 4 weeks ago he was diagnosed with necrosis of the posterior lobe of the pituitary gland caused by a craniocerebral injury. What pathology is observed in the patient?
a. Cushing disease
b. Cushing syndrome
*c. Diabetes insipidus
d. Diabetes mellitus
e. Acromegaly
586. A man came to the dentofacial orthopedist to have dentures made for him. The doctor determined that all the teeth without second antagonists need dentures. Name these teeth:
a. Lower second molars
b. Upper second molars
*c. Upper third molars
d. Lower first molars
e. Lower second premolars
587. A man came to the dentofacial orthopedist to have dentures made for him. The doctor determined that all the teeth without second antagonists need dentures. Name these teeth:
a. Lower second premolars
*b. Upper third molars
c. Lower second molars
d. Upper second molars
e. Lower first molars
588. A man came to the dentofacial orthopedist to have dentures made for him. The doctor determined that all the teeth without second antagonists need dentures. Name these teeth:
a. Lower second premolars
b. Lower second molars
c. Lower first molars
d. Upper second molars
*e. Upper third molars
589. A man came to the virology laboratory of an infectious diseases hospital. He needs to be examined for HIV infection. What methods of laboratory diagnostics for HIV infection and AIDS are currently used in Ukraine?
a. Allergological
b. Biological
c. Virological
*d. Serological
e. Bacteriological
590. A man came to the virology laboratory of an infectious diseases hospital. He needs to be examined for HIV infection. What methods of laboratory diagnostics for HIV infection and AIDS are currently used in Ukraine?
a. Allergological
b. Virological
c. Bacteriological
d. Biological
*e. Serological
591. A man came to the virology laboratory of an infectious diseases hospital. He needs to be examined for HIV infection. What methods of laboratory diagnostics for HIV infection and AIDS are currently used in Ukraine?
a. Bacteriological
*b. Serological
c. Virological
d. Allergological
e. Biological
592. A man cannot lift his drooping lower jaw. What muscles of the head \textbfDO NOT function properly in this case?
a. Superior auricular
*b. Masseters
c. Buccinators
d. Zygomaticus minor
e. Zygomaticus major
593. A man cannot lift his drooping lower jaw. What muscles of the head \textbfDO NOT function properly in this case?
a. Superior auricular
*b. Masseters
c. Zygomaticus major
d. Buccinators
e. Zygomaticus minor
594. A man cannot lift his drooping lower jaw. What muscles of the head \textbfDO NOT function properly in this case?
a. Zygomaticus minor
b. Buccinators
c. Superior auricular
d. Zygomaticus major
*e. Masseters
595. A man complaining of nausea, liquid stool with mucus and blood streaks, high temperature, and weakness was hospitalized into the infectious diseases department. The doctor suspects dysentery. What method of laboratory diagnostics would be the most effective for confirmation of this diagnosis?
*a. Bacteriological analysis
b. Protozoan analysis
c. Mycological analysis
d. Microscopy
e. Serological analysis
596. A man complaining of nausea, liquid stool with mucus and blood streaks, high temperature, and weakness was hospitalized into the infectious diseases department. The doctor suspects dysentery. What method of laboratory diagnostics would be the most effective for confirmation of this diagnosis?
a. Mycological analysis
b. Microscopy
*c. Bacteriological analysis
d. Protozoan analysis
e. Serological analysis
597. A man complaining of nausea, liquid stool with mucus and blood streaks, high temperature, and weakness was hospitalized into the infectious diseases department. The doctor suspects dysentery. What method of laboratory diagnostics would be the most effective for confirmation of this diagnosis?
a. Serological analysis
b. Protozoan analysis
*c. Bacteriological analysis
d. Mycological analysis
e. Microscopy
598. A man complains of varicose veins on his left leg. Venous nodes are located on the posterior surface of the shin and on the posterior and anterior surfaces of the thigh. What superficial leg veins are damaged in this patient?
a. Femoral vein, great saphenous vein, small saphenous vein
b. Popliteal vein, superficial saphenous vein
c. Small saphenous vein, deep femoral vein
d. Posterior tibial vein, great saphenous vein
*e. Great saphenous vein, small saphenous vein
599. A man complains of varicose veins on his left leg. Venous nodes are located on the posterior surface of the shin and on the posterior and anterior surfaces of the thigh. What superficial leg veins are damaged in this patient?
a. Posterior tibial vein, great saphenous vein
b. Popliteal vein, superficial saphenous vein
c. Small saphenous vein, deep femoral vein
d. Femoral vein, great saphenous vein, small saphenous vein
*e. Great saphenous vein, small saphenous vein
600. A man complains of varicose veins on his left leg. Venous nodes are located on the posterior surface of the shin and on the posterior and anterior surfaces of the thigh. What superficial leg veins are damaged in this patient?
a. Posterior tibial vein, great saphenous vein
b. Small saphenous vein, deep femoral vein
*c. Great saphenous vein, small saphenous vein
d. Femoral vein, great saphenous vein, small saphenous vein
e. Popliteal vein, superficial saphenous vein
601. A man complains of weight loss, rapid physical and mental fatigability, decreased appetite, arterial hypotension, and hyperpigmentation of the skin. Examination allowed diagnosing him with Addison's disease. What endocrine gland is hypofunctional in this case, causing this condition in the patient?
*a. Adrenal glands
b. Gonads
c. Thyroid gland
d. Pituitary gland
e. Parathyroid gland
602. A man complains of weight loss, rapid physical and mental fatigability, decreased appetite, arterial hypotension, and hyperpigmentation of the skin. Examination allowed diagnosing him with Addison's disease. What endocrine gland is hypofunctional in this case, causing this condition in the patient?
*a. Adrenal glands
b. Thyroid gland
c. Gonads
d. Parathyroid gland
e. Pituitary gland
603. A man complains of weight loss, rapid physical and mental fatigability, decreased appetite, arterial hypotension, and hyperpigmentation of the skin. Examination allowed diagnosing him with Addison's disease. What endocrine gland is hypofunctional in this case, causing this condition in the patient?
a. Gonads
*b. Adrenal glands
c. Parathyroid gland
d. Thyroid gland
e. Pituitary gland
604. A man complains to a dentist about problems with chewing and pain that occurs when he moves his jaw backwards. The doctor detected an inflammation of a certain masticatory muscle in this patient. Name this muscle:
a. Masseter muscle
b. Medial pterygoid muscle
c. Temporal muscle (anterior fibers)
d. Lateral pterygoid muscle
*e. Temporal muscle (posterior fibers)
605. A man complains to a dentist about problems with chewing and pain that occurs when he moves his jaw backwards. The doctor detected an inflammation of a certain masticatory muscle in this patient. Name this muscle:
a. Medial pterygoid muscle
b. Temporal muscle (anterior fibers)
c. Masseter muscle
d. Lateral pterygoid muscle
*e. Temporal muscle (posterior fibers)
606. A man complains to a dentist about problems with chewing and pain that occurs when he moves his jaw backwards. The doctor detected an inflammation of a certain masticatory muscle in this patient. Name this muscle:
a. Temporal muscle (anterior fibers)
b. Lateral pterygoid muscle
c. Medial pterygoid muscle
d. Masseter muscle
*e. Temporal muscle (posterior fibers)
607. A man developed a malignant neoplasm in his tongue. What characteristics of this tumor allow identifying it as malignant?
a. Anaplasia
b. Expansive growth
c. Increased number of mitotic cells
d. Positive Pasteur effect
*e. Infiltrating growth
608. A man developed a malignant neoplasm in his tongue. What characteristics of this tumor allow identifying it as malignant?
a. Expansive growth
b. Increased number of mitotic cells
*c. Infiltrating growth
d. Anaplasia
e. Positive Pasteur effect
609. A man developed a malignant neoplasm in his tongue. What characteristics of this tumor allow identifying it as malignant?
a. Positive Pasteur effect
b. Anaplasia
*c. Infiltrating growth
d. Expansive growth
e. Increased number of mitotic cells
610. A man diagnosed with arthritis of the maxillofacial joint came to a doctor. The doctor prescribed him an ointment with diclofenac sodium as the active substance. What is the mechanism of action of this medicine?
a. Activation of opiate receptors
b. Blockade of opiate receptors
*c. Cyclooxygenase inhibition
d. Cyclooxygenase activation
e. Phospholipase inhibition
611. A man diagnosed with arthritis of the maxillofacial joint came to a doctor. The doctor prescribed him an ointment with diclofenac sodium as the active substance. What is the mechanism of action of this medicine?
a. Activation of opiate receptors
b. Cyclooxygenase activation
*c. Cyclooxygenase inhibition
d. Blockade of opiate receptors
e. Phospholipase inhibition
612. A man diagnosed with arthritis of the maxillofacial joint came to a doctor. The doctor prescribed him an ointment with diclofenac sodium as the active substance. What is the mechanism of action of this medicine?
a. Phospholipase inhibition
b. Blockade of opiate receptors
c. Cyclooxygenase activation
*d. Cyclooxygenase inhibition
e. Activation of opiate receptors
613. A man has a malignant lingual tumor. The surgeon ligates his A) Lingualis in the area of the Pirogov triangle. I this case, special attention should be paid to the:
a. N. lingualis
*b. N. hypoglossus
c. Ansa cervicalis
d. N. glossopharynseus
e. N. sublingualis
614. A man has a malignant lingual tumor. The surgeon ligates his A) Lingualis in the area of the Pirogov triangle. I this case, special attention should be paid to the:
a. N. lingualis
*b. N. hypoglossus
c. N. glossopharynseus
d. Ansa cervicalis
e. N. sublingualis
615. A man has a malignant lingual tumor. The surgeon ligates his A) Lingualis in the area of the Pirogov triangle. I this case, special attention should be paid to the:
a. N. lingualis
b. N. glossopharynseus
*c. N. hypoglossus
d. N. sublingualis
e. Ansa cervicalis
616. A man has developed downturning mouth and smoothed out nasolabial fold due to influenza complication. What nerve is damaged?
*a. Facial nerve
b. Maxillary nerve
c. Trochlear nerve
d. Mandibular nerve
e. Oculomotor nerve
617. A man has developed downturning mouth and smoothed out nasolabial fold due to influenza complication. What nerve is damaged?
a. Maxillary nerve
*b. Facial nerve
c. Oculomotor nerve
d. Mandibular nerve
e. Trochlear nerve
618. A man has developed downturning mouth and smoothed out nasolabial fold due to influenza complication. What nerve is damaged?
a. Trochlear nerve
b. Oculomotor nerve
*c. Facial nerve
d. Mandibular nerve
e. Maxillary nerve
619. A man has high levels of protein-bound thyroxine (T4) and normal levels of free T3. How would you describe the basal metabolic rate of this man?
a. Decreased
*b. Normal
c. -
d. Extremely high
e. Increased
620. A man has high levels of protein-bound thyroxine (T4) and normal levels of free T3. How would you describe the basal metabolic rate of this man?
a. Decreased
b. Extremely high
*c. Normal
d. Increased
e. -
621. A man has high levels of protein-bound thyroxine (T4) and normal levels of free T3. How would you describe the basal metabolic rate of this man?
a. Decreased
b. Extremely high
c. Increased
d. -
*e. Normal
622. A man is being examined in the maxillofacial surgery department and the doctor studies his mandibular buttresses. How many buttresses are there on the lower jaw?
a. 3
*b. 2
c. 1
d. 5
e. 4
623. A man is being examined in the maxillofacial surgery department and the doctor studies his mandibular buttresses. How many buttresses are there on the lower jaw?
a. 5
*b. 2
c. 3
d. 1
e. 4
624. A man is being examined in the maxillofacial surgery department and the doctor studies his mandibular buttresses. How many buttresses are there on the lower jaw?
a. 5
b. 3
c. 4
d. 1
*e. 2
625. A man is waiting to be invited into the dentist's office. While waiting, he developed palpitations caused by nervousness. What heart rate is normal for a healthy adult?
*a. 60-80/min.
b. 90-110/min.
c. 110-120/min.
d. 150-160/min.
e. 40-60/min.
626. A man is waiting to be invited into the dentist's office. While waiting, he developed palpitations caused by nervousness. What heart rate is normal for a healthy adult?
*a. 60-80/min.
b. 90-110/min.
c. 150-160/min.
d. 40-60/min.
e. 110-120/min.
627. A man is waiting to be invited into the dentist's office. While waiting, he developed palpitations caused by nervousness. What heart rate is normal for a healthy adult?
a. 150-160/min.
b. 40-60/min.
*c. 60-80/min.
d. 90-110/min.
e. 110-120/min.
628. A man presents with impaired pupillary reflex. His pupils are narrowed and he poorly orients in a dark room. What eyeball muscle is dysfunctional in this case?
a. M. ciliars
b. M. sphincter pupillae
*c. M. dilatator pupillae
d. M. obliquus inferior
e. M. obliquus superior
629. A man presents with impaired pupillary reflex. His pupils are narrowed and he poorly orients in a dark room. What eyeball muscle is dysfunctional in this case?
a. M. obliquus superior
b. M. sphincter pupillae
c. M. ciliars
d. M. obliquus inferior
*e. M. dilatator pupillae
630. A man presents with impaired pupillary reflex. His pupils are narrowed and he poorly orients in a dark room. What eyeball muscle is dysfunctional in this case?
a. M. sphincter pupillae
b. M. obliquus inferior
*c. M. dilatator pupillae
d. M. ciliars
e. M. obliquus superior
631. A man presents with suppurative wound in the area of mastoid bone, which resulted in development of cerebral meningitis in the patient. Specify the way of infection penetration into the patient's cranial cavity:
*a. V. emissariae mastoidea
b. V.v. tympanicae
c. V. auricularis
d. V.v. labirinthi
e. V. facialis
632. A man presents with suppurative wound in the area of mastoid bone, which resulted in development of cerebral meningitis in the patient. Specify the way of infection penetration into the patient's cranial cavity:
a. V. auricularis
*b. V. emissariae mastoidea
c. V.v. tympanicae
d. V. facialis
e. V.v. labirinthi
633. A man presents with suppurative wound in the area of mastoid bone, which resulted in development of cerebral meningitis in the patient. Specify the way of infection penetration into the patient's cranial cavity:
a. V. facialis
b. V.v. tympanicae
c. V. auricularis
*d. V. emissariae mastoidea
e. V.v. labirinthi
634. A man underwent a surgery for acute abdomen. His urine is brown, with indican levels over 93 mmol per 24 hours. What can be estimated based on urine indican levels?
*a. Protein putrefaction rate in the intestine
b. Oxidative deamination rate in aromatic amino acids
c. Ammonia neutralization rate
d. Renal filtration ability
e. Decreased activity of ornithine cycle enzymes
635. A man underwent a surgery for acute abdomen. His urine is brown, with indican levels over 93 mmol per 24 hours. What can be estimated based on urine indican levels?
*a. Protein putrefaction rate in the intestine
b. Oxidative deamination rate in aromatic amino acids
c. Decreased activity of ornithine cycle enzymes
d. Ammonia neutralization rate
e. Renal filtration ability
636. A man underwent a surgery for acute abdomen. His urine is brown, with indican levels over 93 mmol per 24 hours. What can be estimated based on urine indican levels?
a. Decreased activity of ornithine cycle enzymes
b. Oxidative deamination rate in aromatic amino acids
c. Renal filtration ability
*d. Protein putrefaction rate in the intestine
e. Ammonia neutralization rate
637. A man uses dentures. The dentist has noticed mucosal lesions with a white coating in his oral cavity. Microscopy of the coating detected large oval Gram-positive cells. What microorganisms have caused stomatitis in the patient?
a. Oral spirochetes
b. Actinomycetes
c. Oral trichomonas
*d. Yeast-like fungi of Candida genus
e. Streptococci
638. A man uses dentures. The dentist has noticed mucosal lesions with a white coating in his oral cavity. Microscopy of the coating detected large oval Gram-positive cells. What microorganisms have caused stomatitis in the patient?
a. Streptococci
*b. Yeast-like fungi of Candida genus
c. Oral trichomonas
d. Oral spirochetes
e. Actinomycetes
639. A man uses dentures. The dentist has noticed mucosal lesions with a white coating in his oral cavity. Microscopy of the coating detected large oval Gram-positive cells. What microorganisms have caused stomatitis in the patient?
a. Streptococci
b. Oral trichomonas
*c. Yeast-like fungi of Candida genus
d. Actinomycetes
e. Oral spirochetes
640. A man was immunized with a recombinant vaccine against hepatitis B) What serological marker was detected in the patient's blood serum?
a. HBe antigen
*b. Anti-HBs IgG
c. Viral DNA
d. Anti-HBc IgM
e. HBs antigen
641. A man was immunized with a recombinant vaccine against hepatitis B) What serological marker was detected in the patient's blood serum?
a. HBe antigen
b. HBs antigen
*c. Anti-HBs IgG
d. Anti-HBc IgM
e. Viral DNA
642. A man was immunized with a recombinant vaccine against hepatitis B) What serological marker was detected in the patient's blood serum?
a. HBs antigen
b. Viral DNA
*c. Anti-HBs IgG
d. HBe antigen
e. Anti-HBc IgM
643. A man with a cardiovascular pathology presents with overproduction of angiotensin II. What enzyme takes part in angiotensin II synthesis?
a. Cyclooxygenase
b. Kallikrein
c. Kininase
d. Urokinase
*e. Angiotensin converting enzyme
644. A man with a cardiovascular pathology presents with overproduction of angiotensin II. What enzyme takes part in angiotensin II synthesis?
a. Kallikrein
b. Urokinase
c. Kininase
d. Cyclooxygenase
*e. Angiotensin converting enzyme
645. A man with a cardiovascular pathology presents with overproduction of angiotensin II. What enzyme takes part in angiotensin II synthesis?
a. Kininase
b. Urokinase
c. Cyclooxygenase
*d. Angiotensin converting enzyme
e. Kallikrein
646. A man with mandibular sarcoma presents with metaplasia in his biopsy material. Describe this phenomenon:
*a. Tumor tissue assumes the properties of other tissue
b. Cells lose their ability to differentiate
c. Tumor progression
d. Intensified mitosis of tumor cells
e. Tumor cells revert to their normal condition
647. A man with mandibular sarcoma presents with metaplasia in his biopsy material. Describe this phenomenon:
a. Cells lose their ability to differentiate
b. Tumor cells revert to their normal condition
c. Tumor progression
d. Intensified mitosis of tumor cells
*e. Tumor tissue assumes the properties of other tissue
648. A man with mandibular sarcoma presents with metaplasia in his biopsy material. Describe this phenomenon:
a. Tumor cells revert to their normal condition
b. Tumor progression
*c. Tumor tissue assumes the properties of other tissue
d. Intensified mitosis of tumor cells
e. Cells lose their ability to differentiate
649. A man with signs of intestinal obstruction was delivered to a hospital. In the process of treatment, roundworms 25-40 cm in size were extracted from the patent's intestine. Determine the species of this helminth:
a. Strongyloides stercoralis
*b. Ascaris lumbricoides
c. Enterobius vermicularis
d. Trichocephalus trichiurus
e. Ancylostoma duodenale
650. A man with signs of intestinal obstruction was delivered to a hospital. In the process of treatment, roundworms 25-40 cm in size were extracted from the patent's intestine. Determine the species of this helminth:
a. Strongyloides stercoralis
b. Trichocephalus trichiurus
*c. Ascaris lumbricoides
d. Enterobius vermicularis
e. Ancylostoma duodenale
651. A man with signs of intestinal obstruction was delivered to a hospital. In the process of treatment, roundworms 25-40 cm in size were extracted from the patent's intestine. Determine the species of this helminth:
a. Trichocephalus trichiurus
b. Enterobius vermicularis
c. Ancylostoma duodenale
*d. Ascaris lumbricoides
e. Strongyloides stercoralis
652. A man, his son, and his daughter have no premolars. The same anomaly was observed in the patrilineal grandfather. What pattern of inheritance is likely in this anomaly?
a. Autosomal recessive
b. X-linked recessive
*c. Autosomal dominant
d. X-linked dominant
e. Y-linked
653. A man, his son, and his daughter have no premolars. The same anomaly was observed in the patrilineal grandfather. What pattern of inheritance is likely in this anomaly?
a. X-linked dominant
*b. Autosomal dominant
c. Y-linked
d. X-linked recessive
e. Autosomal recessive
654. A man, his son, and his daughter have no premolars. The same anomaly was observed in the patrilineal grandfather. What pattern of inheritance is likely in this anomaly?
a. Y-linked
b. X-linked dominant
c. X-linked recessive
*d. Autosomal dominant
e. Autosomal recessive
655. A man, who accidentally rinsed his mouth with vinegar essence instead of chlorhexidine solution, was brought to a dental clinic. He complains of burning pain during eating. Examination revealed a dense whitish-gray film on his oral mucosa. What keratoplastic drug was prescribed by the dentist in the course of treatment in this case?
*a. Vinylin (Polyvinox)
b. Anaesthesin (Benzocaine)
c. Magnesia
d. Diazolin (Mebhydrolin)
e. Sodium bicarbonate
656. A man, who accidentally rinsed his mouth with vinegar essence instead of chlorhexidine solution, was brought to a dental clinic. He complains of burning pain during eating. Examination revealed a dense whitish-gray film on his oral mucosa. What keratoplastic drug was prescribed by the dentist in the course of treatment in this case?
a. Diazolin (Mebhydrolin)
*b. Vinylin (Polyvinox)
c. Anaesthesin (Benzocaine)
d. Sodium bicarbonate
e. Magnesia
657. A man, who accidentally rinsed his mouth with vinegar essence instead of chlorhexidine solution, was brought to a dental clinic. He complains of burning pain during eating. Examination revealed a dense whitish-gray film on his oral mucosa. What keratoplastic drug was prescribed by the dentist in the course of treatment in this case?
a. Sodium bicarbonate
b. Magnesia
c. Diazolin (Mebhydrolin)
*d. Vinylin (Polyvinox)
e. Anaesthesin (Benzocaine)
658. A man, who for a long time has been suffering from chronic mandibular osteomyelitis, died of chronic kidney disease. Autopsy revealed large lardaceous kidneys. What process had occurred in the kidneys?
*a. Renal amyloidosis
b. Glomerulonephritis
c. Arterial nephrosclerosis
d. Necrotic nephrosis
e. Contracted kidney
659. A man, who for a long time has been suffering from chronic mandibular osteomyelitis, died of chronic kidney disease. Autopsy revealed large lardaceous kidneys. What process had occurred in the kidneys?
*a. Renal amyloidosis
b. Glomerulonephritis
c. Necrotic nephrosis
d. Arterial nephrosclerosis
e. Contracted kidney
660. A man, who for a long time has been suffering from chronic mandibular osteomyelitis, died of chronic kidney disease. Autopsy revealed large lardaceous kidneys. What process had occurred in the kidneys?
a. Glomerulonephritis
b. Contracted kidney
c. Arterial nephrosclerosis
d. Necrotic nephrosis
*e. Renal amyloidosis
661. A man, who for a long time has been suffering from chronic mandibular osteomyelitis, died of renal failure. Autopsy shows enlarged yellow-white kidneys that are extremely dense and have a waxy sheen. Light microscopy detected deposits of homogeneous pink masses in the glomerular capillary loops, walls of arterioles and arteries, canalicular basement membrane, and stroma. These deposits color brick-red when stained with Congo red. What process developed in the kidneys?
a. General hyalinosis
*b. Secondary amyloidosis
c. Fibrinoid necrosis
d. Primary amyloidosis
e. Local hyalinosis
662. A man, who for a long time has been suffering from chronic mandibular osteomyelitis, died of renal failure. Autopsy shows enlarged yellow-white kidneys that are extremely dense and have a waxy sheen. Light microscopy detected deposits of homogeneous pink masses in the glomerular capillary loops, walls of arterioles and arteries, canalicular basement membrane, and stroma. These deposits color brick-red when stained with Congo red. What process developed in the kidneys?
a. Local hyalinosis
b. Fibrinoid necrosis
*c. Secondary amyloidosis
d. General hyalinosis
e. Primary amyloidosis
663. A man, who for a long time has been suffering from chronic mandibular osteomyelitis, died of renal failure. Autopsy shows enlarged yellow-white kidneys that are extremely dense and have a waxy sheen. Light microscopy detected deposits of homogeneous pink masses in the glomerular capillary loops, walls of arterioles and arteries, canalicular basement membrane, and stroma. These deposits color brick-red when stained with Congo red. What process developed in the kidneys?
a. Primary amyloidosis
b. Fibrinoid necrosis
*c. Secondary amyloidosis
d. General hyalinosis
e. Local hyalinosis
664. A microslide of the cerebral cortex shows large pyramidal cells. What is the name of the scientist who discovered these cells?
*a. Betz
b. Lenhossek
c. Cajal
d. Nissl
e. Golgi
665. A microslide of the cerebral cortex shows large pyramidal cells. What is the name of the scientist who discovered these cells?
a. Cajal
b. Golgi
c. Nissl
*d. Betz
e. Lenhossek
666. A microslide of the cerebral cortex shows large pyramidal cells. What is the name of the scientist who discovered these cells?
a. Golgi
b. Cajal
c. Nissl
d. Lenhossek
*e. Betz
667. A microslide shows a blood vessel. Its tunica intima is represented by endothelium and subendothelium. Its tunica media is represented by bundles of smooth myocytes, interlayed with loose fibrous connective tissue. Its tunica externa is well-developed and formed by loose connective tissue with separate smooth myocytes. What vessel has such morphological characteristics?
*a. Muscular vein
b. Mixed type artery
c. Nonmuscular vein
d. Muscular artery
e. Elastic artery
668. A microslide shows a blood vessel. Its tunica intima is represented by endothelium and subendothelium. Its tunica media is represented by bundles of smooth myocytes, interlayed with loose fibrous connective tissue. Its tunica externa is well-developed and formed by loose connective tissue with separate smooth myocytes. What vessel has such morphological characteristics?
a. Mixed type artery
b. Nonmuscular vein
*c. Muscular vein
d. Muscular artery
e. Elastic artery
669. A microslide shows a blood vessel. Its tunica intima is represented by endothelium and subendothelium. Its tunica media is represented by bundles of smooth myocytes, interlayed with loose fibrous connective tissue. Its tunica externa is well-developed and formed by loose connective tissue with separate smooth myocytes. What vessel has such morphological characteristics?
a. Nonmuscular vein
b. Elastic artery
c. Muscular artery
*d. Muscular vein
e. Mixed type artery
670. A microslide shows a section of a bean-shaped organ with cortical and medullary substances. Its cortical substance contains separate spheric nodules 0.5-1 mm in diameter; its medullary substance consists of medullary cords. This histological section demonstrates the following organ:
a. Adrenal gland
b. Spleen
c. Kidney
*d. Lymph node
e. Thymus
671. A microslide shows a section of a bean-shaped organ with cortical and medullary substances. Its cortical substance contains separate spheric nodules 0.5-1 mm in diameter; its medullary substance consists of medullary cords. This histological section demonstrates the following organ:
a. Kidney
b. Spleen
c. Adrenal gland
d. Thymus
*e. Lymph node
672. A microslide shows a section of a bean-shaped organ with cortical and medullary substances. Its cortical substance contains separate spheric nodules 0.5-1 mm in diameter; its medullary substance consists of medullary cords. This histological section demonstrates the following organ:
a. Spleen
b. Adrenal gland
c. Kidney
d. Thymus
*e. Lymph node
673. A microspecimen of heart shows rectangular cells from 50 to 120 micrometer in size with central position of nucleus and developed myofibrils. The cells are connected by intercalated discs. These cells are responsible for the following function:
*a. Function of heart contractions
b. Endocrine
c. Protective
d. Function of impulse conduction
e. Regeneratory
674. A microspecimen of heart shows rectangular cells from 50 to 120 micrometer in size with central position of nucleus and developed myofibrils. The cells are connected by intercalated discs. These cells are responsible for the following function:
a. Endocrine
b. Regeneratory
*c. Function of heart contractions
d. Function of impulse conduction
e. Protective
675. A microspecimen of heart shows rectangular cells from 50 to 120 micrometer in size with central position of nucleus and developed myofibrils. The cells are connected by intercalated discs. These cells are responsible for the following function:
a. Regeneratory
b. Endocrine
*c. Function of heart contractions
d. Function of impulse conduction
e. Protective
676. A newborn failed to take his first breath. Autopsy revealed that despite unobstructed airways the lungs of the newborn were unable to stretch. What is the most likely cause of this condition?
a. Bronchial narrowing
*b. Absence of surfactant
c. Alveolar enlargement
d. Bronchial rupture
e. Pleural thickening
677. A newborn failed to take his first breath. Autopsy revealed that despite unobstructed airways the lungs of the newborn were unable to stretch. What is the most likely cause of this condition?
a. Pleural thickening
*b. Absence of surfactant
c. Alveolar enlargement
d. Bronchial rupture
e. Bronchial narrowing
678. A newborn has well-developed jaws with tooth buds for both deciduous and permanent teeth in the each one. How many tooth buds are there in one jaw of the newborn?
a. 10 deciduous teeth and 10 permanent teeth
b. 10 deciduous teeth and 16 permanent teeth
*c. 10 deciduous teeth and 8 permanent teeth
d. 20 deciduous teeth and 10 permanent teeth
e. 20 deciduous teeth
679. A newborn has well-developed jaws with tooth buds for both deciduous and permanent teeth in the each one. How many tooth buds are there in one jaw of the newborn?
a. 10 deciduous teeth and 16 permanent teeth
*b. 10 deciduous teeth and 8 permanent teeth
c. 20 deciduous teeth
d. 10 deciduous teeth and 10 permanent teeth
e. 20 deciduous teeth and 10 permanent teeth
680. A newborn has well-developed jaws with tooth buds for both deciduous and permanent teeth in the each one. How many tooth buds are there in one jaw of the newborn?
a. 10 deciduous teeth and 16 permanent teeth
b. 20 deciduous teeth
c. 10 deciduous teeth and 10 permanent teeth
d. 20 deciduous teeth and 10 permanent teeth
*e. 10 deciduous teeth and 8 permanent teeth
681. A patient being treated for viral B hepatitis developed signs of hepatic failure. What changes in the blood test that indicate a protein metabolism disorder will most likely be observed in this case?
a. Absolute hyperalbuminemia
*b. Absolute hypoalbuminemia
c. Absolute hyperfibrinogenemia
d. Absolute hyperglobulinemia
e. Blood protein composition is unchanged
682. A patient being treated for viral B hepatitis developed signs of hepatic failure. What changes in the blood test that indicate a protein metabolism disorder will most likely be observed in this case?
a. Absolute hyperfibrinogenemia
b. Absolute hyperalbuminemia
*c. Absolute hypoalbuminemia
d. Blood protein composition is unchanged
e. Absolute hyperglobulinemia
683. A patient being treated for viral B hepatitis developed signs of hepatic failure. What changes in the blood test that indicate a protein metabolism disorder will most likely be observed in this case?
a. Blood protein composition is unchanged
b. Absolute hyperfibrinogenemia
c. Absolute hyperglobulinemia
d. Absolute hyperalbuminemia
*e. Absolute hypoalbuminemia
684. A patient came to a dentist complaining of fever and characteristic small vesicles on the buccal, palatal, and lingual mucosa. The dentist suspects herpetic stomatitis. What additional test is necessary to confirm the diagnosis?
a. Inoculation on Rappaport medium
b. Precipitation reaction
c. Inoculation on medium 199 with addition of bovine serum
*d. Inoculation of chick chorioallantoic membrane or brain tissue of white mice
e. Inoculation on Eagle medium
685. A patient came to a dentist complaining of fever and characteristic small vesicles on the buccal, palatal, and lingual mucosa. The dentist suspects herpetic stomatitis. What additional test is necessary to confirm the diagnosis?
a. Inoculation on medium 199 with addition of bovine serum
b. Inoculation on Eagle medium
c. Precipitation reaction
*d. Inoculation of chick chorioallantoic membrane or brain tissue of white mice
e. Inoculation on Rappaport medium
686. A patient came to a dentist complaining of fever and characteristic small vesicles on the buccal, palatal, and lingual mucosa. The dentist suspects herpetic stomatitis. What additional test is necessary to confirm the diagnosis?
a. Precipitation reaction
b. Inoculation on Rappaport medium
c. Inoculation on Eagle medium
*d. Inoculation of chick chorioallantoic membrane or brain tissue of white mice
e. Inoculation on medium 199 with addition of bovine serum
687. A patient came to a family doctor with complaints of weakness, weight loss, and enlarged cervical lymph nodes. Microscopy of the biopsy material obtained from a lymph node shows giant multinucleated Reed-Sternberg cells, lymphocytes, plasma cells, histiocytes, eosinophils, and areas of necrosis and sclerosis. What disease can be characterized by the described changes?
*a. Lymphogranulomatosis (Hodgkin lymphoma)
b. Lymphocytic leukemia
c. Lymphosarcoma
d. Tuberculosis
e. Sarcoidosis
688. A patient came to a family doctor with complaints of weakness, weight loss, and enlarged cervical lymph nodes. Microscopy of the biopsy material obtained from a lymph node shows giant multinucleated Reed-Sternberg cells, lymphocytes, plasma cells, histiocytes, eosinophils, and areas of necrosis and sclerosis. What disease can be characterized by the described changes?
*a. Lymphogranulomatosis (Hodgkin lymphoma)
b. Lymphosarcoma
c. Sarcoidosis
d. Tuberculosis
e. Lymphocytic leukemia
689. A patient came to a family doctor with complaints of weakness, weight loss, and enlarged cervical lymph nodes. Microscopy of the biopsy material obtained from a lymph node shows giant multinucleated Reed-Sternberg cells, lymphocytes, plasma cells, histiocytes, eosinophils, and areas of necrosis and sclerosis. What disease can be characterized by the described changes?
a. Lymphocytic leukemia
*b. Lymphogranulomatosis (Hodgkin lymphoma)
c. Lymphosarcoma
d. Tuberculosis
e. Sarcoidosis
690. A patient came to the dentist for tooth extraction. After the tooth had been extracted, the bleeding from the socket persisted for 15 minutes. The patient has a history of active chronic hepatitis. What is the likely cause of the prolonged bleeding time?
a. Decreased albumin blood count
*b. Decreased blood level of fibrinogen
c. Thrombocytopenia
d. Increased activity of anticoagulation system
e. Hypocalcemia
691. A patient came to the dentist for tooth extraction. After the tooth had been extracted, the bleeding from the socket persisted for 15 minutes. The patient has a history of active chronic hepatitis. What is the likely cause of the prolonged bleeding time?
a. Decreased albumin blood count
b. Increased activity of anticoagulation system
*c. Decreased blood level of fibrinogen
d. Thrombocytopenia
e. Hypocalcemia
692. A patient came to the dentist for tooth extraction. After the tooth had been extracted, the bleeding from the socket persisted for 15 minutes. The patient has a history of active chronic hepatitis. What is the likely cause of the prolonged bleeding time?
a. Increased activity of anticoagulation system
*b. Decreased blood level of fibrinogen
c. Thrombocytopenia
d. Hypocalcemia
e. Decreased albumin blood count
693. A patient came to the doctor with complaints of general weakness and sleep disturbances. Objectively the patient's skin is yellow. In blood there is increased concentration of direct bilirubin and bile acids. Acholic stool is observed. What condition can be characterized by these changes?
a. Chronic cholecystitis
b. Familial nonhemolytic (Gilbert's) syndrome
*c. Mechanical jaundice
d. Parenchymatous jaundice
e. Hemolytic jaundice
694. A patient came to the doctor with complaints of general weakness and sleep disturbances. Objectively the patient's skin is yellow. In blood there is increased concentration of direct bilirubin and bile acids. Acholic stool is observed. What condition can be characterized by these changes?
a. Chronic cholecystitis
b. Parenchymatous jaundice
c. Familial nonhemolytic (Gilbert's) syndrome
d. Hemolytic jaundice
*e. Mechanical jaundice
695. A patient came to the doctor with complaints of general weakness and sleep disturbances. Objectively the patient's skin is yellow. In blood there is increased concentration of direct bilirubin and bile acids. Acholic stool is observed. What condition can be characterized by these changes?
a. Parenchymatous jaundice
b. Hemolytic jaundice
*c. Mechanical jaundice
d. Chronic cholecystitis
e. Familial nonhemolytic (Gilbert's) syndrome
696. A patient came to the traumatologist with complaints of developing difficulties during active extension of elbow. What muscle is the most likely to be damaged?
a. M. coracobrachialis
*b. M. triceps brachii
c. M. pectoralis minor
d. M. deltoideus
e. M. latissimus dorsi
697. A patient came to the traumatologist with complaints of developing difficulties during active extension of elbow. What muscle is the most likely to be damaged?
a. M. deltoideus
b. M. coracobrachialis
*c. M. triceps brachii
d. M. pectoralis minor
e. M. latissimus dorsi
698. A patient came to the traumatologist with complaints of developing difficulties during active extension of elbow. What muscle is the most likely to be damaged?
a. M. pectoralis minor
b. M. deltoideus
c. M. latissimus dorsi
*d. M. triceps brachii
e. M. coracobrachialis
699. A patient complaining of intense toothache was prescribed a non-narcotic analgesic (an aniline derivative) with a marked analgesic and antipyretic effect and a weak anti-inflammatory effect. What drug is it?
*a. Paracetamol
b. Butadion (Phenylbutazone)
c. Ibuprofen
d. Acetylsalicylic acid
e. Analgin (Metamizole sodium)
700. A patient complaining of intense toothache was prescribed a non-narcotic analgesic (an aniline derivative) with a marked analgesic and antipyretic effect and a weak anti-inflammatory effect. What drug is it?
a. Butadion (Phenylbutazone)
*b. Paracetamol
c. Acetylsalicylic acid
d. Analgin (Metamizole sodium)
e. Ibuprofen
701. A patient complaining of intense toothache was prescribed a non-narcotic analgesic (an aniline derivative) with a marked analgesic and antipyretic effect and a weak anti-inflammatory effect. What drug is it?
a. Butadion (Phenylbutazone)
b. Analgin (Metamizole sodium)
c. Acetylsalicylic acid
d. Ibuprofen
*e. Paracetamol
702. A patient complaining of polydipsia, polyphagia, and polyuria excretes glucose with urine. What disease can be suspected?
a. Acromegalia
b. Diabetes insipidus
c. Insulinoma
d. Addison disease
*e. Diabetes mellitus
703. A patient complaining of polydipsia, polyphagia, and polyuria excretes glucose with urine. What disease can be suspected?
a. Addison disease
b. Insulinoma
*c. Diabetes mellitus
d. Acromegalia
e. Diabetes insipidus
704. A patient complaining of polydipsia, polyphagia, and polyuria excretes glucose with urine. What disease can be suspected?
a. Addison disease
b. Insulinoma
c. Diabetes insipidus
*d. Diabetes mellitus
e. Acromegalia
705. A patient complains of acute spastic abdominal pain, frequent urge to defecate, liquid bloody feces with mucus. Laboratory analysis of fecal smear revealed inconstant in shape organisms with erythrocytes. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Balantidiasis
b. Lambliasis
*c. Amebiasis
d. Intestinal trichomoniasis
e. Schistosomiasis
706. A patient complains of acute spastic abdominal pain, frequent urge to defecate, liquid bloody feces with mucus. Laboratory analysis of fecal smear revealed inconstant in shape organisms with erythrocytes. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Lambliasis
*b. Amebiasis
c. Intestinal trichomoniasis
d. Schistosomiasis
e. Balantidiasis
707. A patient complains of acute spastic abdominal pain, frequent urge to defecate, liquid bloody feces with mucus. Laboratory analysis of fecal smear revealed inconstant in shape organisms with erythrocytes. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Schistosomiasis
b. Intestinal trichomoniasis
c. Balantidiasis
d. Lambliasis
*e. Amebiasis
708. A patient complains of pain in the eyeballs. Examination detects an increase in the intraocular pressure. This condition has been caused by impaired outflow of a certain fluid. What fluid is it?
a. Endolymph
*b. Aqueous humour
c. Perilymph
d. Lymph
e. Tears
709. A patient complains of pain in the eyeballs. Examination detects an increase in the intraocular pressure. This condition has been caused by impaired outflow of a certain fluid. What fluid is it?
a. Perilymph
*b. Aqueous humour
c. Lymph
d. Tears
e. Endolymph
710. A patient complains of pain in the eyeballs. Examination detects an increase in the intraocular pressure. This condition has been caused by impaired outflow of a certain fluid. What fluid is it?
a. Tears
b. Perilymph
*c. Aqueous humour
d. Lymph
e. Endolymph
711. A patient complains of painful chewing, especially when his lower jaw moves forward and to the side. It indicates functional disorder of the following muscles:
*a. Lateral pterygoid muscles
b. Mylohyoid muscles
c. Masseter muscles
d. Temporal muscles
e. Medial pterygoid muscles
712. A patient complains of painful chewing, especially when his lower jaw moves forward and to the side. It indicates functional disorder of the following muscles:
a. Masseter muscles
b. Temporal muscles
c. Mylohyoid muscles
d. Medial pterygoid muscles
*e. Lateral pterygoid muscles
713. A patient complains of painful chewing, especially when his lower jaw moves forward and to the side. It indicates functional disorder of the following muscles:
a. Temporal muscles
b. Medial pterygoid muscles
c. Masseter muscles
*d. Lateral pterygoid muscles
e. Mylohyoid muscles
714. A patient complains of productive cough and general weakness. Laboratory analysis of sputum revealed larvae. It is a characteristic sign of:
a. Cysticercosis
b. Enterobiasis
c. Taeniasis
*d. Ascariasis
e. Opisthorchiasis
715. A patient complains of productive cough and general weakness. Laboratory analysis of sputum revealed larvae. It is a characteristic sign of:
a. Enterobiasis
b. Cysticercosis
c. Taeniasis
*d. Ascariasis
e. Opisthorchiasis
716. A patient complains of productive cough and general weakness. Laboratory analysis of sputum revealed larvae. It is a characteristic sign of:
a. Enterobiasis
b. Taeniasis
c. Opisthorchiasis
*d. Ascariasis
e. Cysticercosis
717. A patient complains of severe rhinitis and total loss of olfactory perception. Receptors of the olfactory analyzer are damaged in this patient. Where in the nasal cavity are these receptors located?
a. Common nasal meatus
b. Middle nasal meatus
c. Choanae
*d. Superior nasal meatus
e. Inferior nasal meatus
718. A patient complains of severe rhinitis and total loss of olfactory perception. Receptors of the olfactory analyzer are damaged in this patient. Where in the nasal cavity are these receptors located?
a. Inferior nasal meatus
b. Middle nasal meatus
c. Choanae
*d. Superior nasal meatus
e. Common nasal meatus
719. A patient complains of severe rhinitis and total loss of olfactory perception. Receptors of the olfactory analyzer are damaged in this patient. Where in the nasal cavity are these receptors located?
a. Middle nasal meatus
b. Inferior nasal meatus
*c. Superior nasal meatus
d. Choanae
e. Common nasal meatus
720. A patient complains of toothache. Examination revealed a carious cavity that exposes the pulp. What stage of caries is it?
a. Circular caries
b. Chalky lesion
c. Superficial caries
*d. Deep caries
e. Median caries
721. A patient complains of toothache. Examination revealed a carious cavity that exposes the pulp. What stage of caries is it?
a. Circular caries
b. Median caries
c. Chalky lesion
*d. Deep caries
e. Superficial caries
722. A patient complains of toothache. Examination revealed a carious cavity that exposes the pulp. What stage of caries is it?
a. Median caries
b. Chalky lesion
c. Superficial caries
*d. Deep caries
e. Circular caries
723. A patient complains of urine excretion that occurs during sexual intercourse. What organ is affected?
a. Epididymis
b. Urinary bladder
*c. Prostate
d. Testicle
e. Seminal vesicles
724. A patient complains of urine excretion that occurs during sexual intercourse. What organ is affected?
a. Seminal vesicles
*b. Prostate
c. Epididymis
d. Testicle
e. Urinary bladder
725. A patient complains of urine excretion that occurs during sexual intercourse. What organ is affected?
a. Testicle
*b. Prostate
c. Urinary bladder
d. Epididymis
e. Seminal vesicles
726. A patient complains that even small traumas lead to persistent hemorrhages. Laboratory analysis shows disturbed blood composition, namely a low count of the following blood corpuscles:
*a. Platelets
b. Neutrophils
c. Lymphocytes
d. Erythrocytes
e. Monocytes
727. A patient complains that even small traumas lead to persistent hemorrhages. Laboratory analysis shows disturbed blood composition, namely a low count of the following blood corpuscles:
a. Neutrophils
*b. Platelets
c. Lymphocytes
d. Monocytes
e. Erythrocytes
728. A patient complains that even small traumas lead to persistent hemorrhages. Laboratory analysis shows disturbed blood composition, namely a low count of the following blood corpuscles:
a. Neutrophils
*b. Platelets
c. Monocytes
d. Lymphocytes
e. Erythrocytes
729. A patient consulted a doctor about a dislocation of the articular head of the mandible. What type of bone connection can be observed in this joint?
*a. Diarthrosis
b. Synostosis
c. Syndesmosis
d. Hemiarthrosis
e. Synchondrosis
730. A patient consulted a doctor about a dislocation of the articular head of the mandible. What type of bone connection can be observed in this joint?
a. Synchondrosis
*b. Diarthrosis
c. Syndesmosis
d. Hemiarthrosis
e. Synostosis
731. A patient consulted a doctor about a dislocation of the articular head of the mandible. What type of bone connection can be observed in this joint?
a. Synostosis
b. Syndesmosis
*c. Diarthrosis
d. Hemiarthrosis
e. Synchondrosis
732. A patient consulted a doctor about an increased pain sensitivity of the ear skin and ear canal. Palpation behind the sternocleidomastoid muscle was painful. Such clinical presentations are typical of the irritation of the following nerve:
a. N. vagus
b. N. occipitalis minor
c. N. transversus colli
d. Nn. supraclaviculares
*e. N. auricularis magnus
733. A patient consulted a doctor about an increased pain sensitivity of the ear skin and ear canal. Palpation behind the sternocleidomastoid muscle was painful. Such clinical presentations are typical of the irritation of the following nerve:
a. N. vagus
b. N. transversus colli
c. N. occipitalis minor
d. Nn. supraclaviculares
*e. N. auricularis magnus
734. A patient consulted a doctor about an increased pain sensitivity of the ear skin and ear canal. Palpation behind the sternocleidomastoid muscle was painful. Such clinical presentations are typical of the irritation of the following nerve:
a. Nn. supraclaviculares
b. N. vagus
c. N. transversus colli
d. N. occipitalis minor
*e. N. auricularis magnus
735. A patient delivered to the neurological department presents with increased inhibition processes in the central nervous system. What neurotransmitter can cause this condition, when in excess?
a. Adrenaline
b. Acetylcholine
*c. GABA
d. Noradrenaline
e. Dopamine
736. A patient delivered to the neurological department presents with increased inhibition processes in the central nervous system. What neurotransmitter can cause this condition, when in excess?
a. Dopamine
b. Adrenaline
c. Noradrenaline
d. Acetylcholine
*e. GABA
737. A patient delivered to the neurological department presents with increased inhibition processes in the central nervous system. What neurotransmitter can cause this condition, when in excess?
a. Noradrenaline
b. Adrenaline
*c. GABA
d. Acetylcholine
e. Dopamine
738. A patient developed a keloid scar in the area of a purulent skin inflammation (carbuncle). At what stage of inflammation does it occur?
a. -
b. Secondary alteration
c. Exudation
d. Primary alteration
*e. Proliferation
739. A patient developed a keloid scar in the area of a purulent skin inflammation (carbuncle). At what stage of inflammation does it occur?
a. Exudation
b. Secondary alteration
*c. Proliferation
d. Primary alteration
e. -
740. A patient developed a keloid scar in the area of a purulent skin inflammation (carbuncle). At what stage of inflammation does it occur?
a. Secondary alteration
*b. Proliferation
c. Primary alteration
d. Exudation
e. -
741. A patient developed a seizure attack during a tooth extraction. What first aid medicine must be used in this case?
*a. Sibazon (Diazepam)
b. Corvalol
c. Dimedrol (Diphenhydramine)
d. Phenobarbital
e. Valerian tincture
742. A patient developed a seizure attack during a tooth extraction. What first aid medicine must be used in this case?
a. Dimedrol (Diphenhydramine)
*b. Sibazon (Diazepam)
c. Corvalol
d. Phenobarbital
e. Valerian tincture
743. A patient developed a seizure attack during a tooth extraction. What first aid medicine must be used in this case?
a. Valerian tincture
b. Phenobarbital
*c. Sibazon (Diazepam)
d. Dimedrol (Diphenhydramine)
e. Corvalol
744. A patient developed a tender red nodule in the lower jaw area. Histologically there is accumulation of purulent exudate in several hair follicles. What clinicopathological type of inflammation is observed?
a. Abscess
*b. Carbuncle
c. Furuncle
d. Hypostatic abscess
e. Phlegmon
745. A patient developed a tender red nodule in the lower jaw area. Histologically there is accumulation of purulent exudate in several hair follicles. What clinicopathological type of inflammation is observed?
a. Abscess
b. Hypostatic abscess
c. Phlegmon
*d. Carbuncle
e. Furuncle
746. A patient developed a tender red nodule in the lower jaw area. Histologically there is accumulation of purulent exudate in several hair follicles. What clinicopathological type of inflammation is observed?
a. Hypostatic abscess
*b. Carbuncle
c. Furuncle
d. Phlegmon
e. Abscess
747. A patient developed anaphylactic shock after administration of novocaine (procaine) for conduction anesthesia. What is the drug of choice for shock relief in this case?
*a. Adrenalin hydrochloride
b. Dimedrol (Diphenhydramine)
c. Noradrenaline hydrotartrate
d. Prednisolone
e. Suprastin (Chloropyramine)
748. A patient developed anaphylactic shock after administration of novocaine (procaine) for conduction anesthesia. What is the drug of choice for shock relief in this case?
a. Dimedrol (Diphenhydramine)
*b. Adrenalin hydrochloride
c. Prednisolone
d. Noradrenaline hydrotartrate
e. Suprastin (Chloropyramine)
749. A patient developed anaphylactic shock after administration of novocaine (procaine) for conduction anesthesia. What is the drug of choice for shock relief in this case?
a. Dimedrol (Diphenhydramine)
*b. Adrenalin hydrochloride
c. Prednisolone
d. Suprastin (Chloropyramine)
e. Noradrenaline hydrotartrate
750. A patient developed burning sensation in the oral cavity and white fuzzy coating on the tongue. Oral thrush is diagnosed. What drug of those listed below should be used?
*a. Nystatin
b. Tetracycline
c. Griseofulvin
d. Gentamicin
e. Amphotericin
751. A patient developed burning sensation in the oral cavity and white fuzzy coating on the tongue. Oral thrush is diagnosed. What drug of those listed below should be used?
a. Amphotericin
*b. Nystatin
c. Tetracycline
d. Gentamicin
e. Griseofulvin
752. A patient developed burning sensation in the oral cavity and white fuzzy coating on the tongue. Oral thrush is diagnosed. What drug of those listed below should be used?
a. Gentamicin
b. Amphotericin
*c. Nystatin
d. Tetracycline
e. Griseofulvin
753. A patient developed hypersalivation during dental manipulations. What group of drugs can inhibit saliva production?
a. Adrenergic agonists
b. Astringents
c. Adrenergic antagonists
*d. Cholinergic antagonists
e. Cholinergic agonists
754. A patient developed hypersalivation during dental manipulations. What group of drugs can inhibit saliva production?
a. Adrenergic antagonists
b. Adrenergic agonists
*c. Cholinergic antagonists
d. Astringents
e. Cholinergic agonists
755. A patient developed hypersalivation during dental manipulations. What group of drugs can inhibit saliva production?
a. Cholinergic agonists
b. Adrenergic antagonists
c. Astringents
*d. Cholinergic antagonists
e. Adrenergic agonists
756. A patient diagnosed with acute pulpitis complains of toothache and swollen lower face on the side of the affected tooth. What is the leading mechanism of edema development in this disease?
*a. Disturbed microcirculation in the lesion focus
b. Disturbed trophic function of the  nervous system
c. Hypoproteinemia
d. Disturbed nerve regulation of water  metabolism
e. Increased aldosterone production
757. A patient diagnosed with acute pulpitis complains of toothache and swollen lower face on the side of the affected tooth. What is the leading mechanism of edema development in this disease?
a. Disturbed nerve regulation of water  metabolism
b. Hypoproteinemia
*c. Disturbed microcirculation in the lesion focus
d. Disturbed trophic function of the  nervous system
e. Increased aldosterone production
758. A patient diagnosed with acute pulpitis complains of toothache and swollen lower face on the side of the affected tooth. What is the leading mechanism of edema development in this disease?
a. Disturbed trophic function of the  nervous system
b. Disturbed nerve regulation of water  metabolism
c. Hypoproteinemia
d. Increased aldosterone production
*e. Disturbed microcirculation in the lesion focus
759. A patient diagnosed with arthritis of the maxillofacial joint was taking a non-narcotic analgesic that is a paraaminophenol derivative. Select this drug from the list:
a. Analgin (Metamizole)
b. Diclofenac sodium
c. Butadion (Phenylbutazone)
d. Ibuprofen
*e. Paracetamol
760. A patient diagnosed with arthritis of the maxillofacial joint was taking a non-narcotic analgesic that is a paraaminophenol derivative. Select this drug from the list:
a. Ibuprofen
b. Analgin (Metamizole)
*c. Paracetamol
d. Butadion (Phenylbutazone)
e. Diclofenac sodium
761. A patient diagnosed with arthritis of the maxillofacial joint was taking a non-narcotic analgesic that is a paraaminophenol derivative. Select this drug from the list:
a. Ibuprofen
b. Analgin (Metamizole)
*c. Paracetamol
d. Diclofenac sodium
e. Butadion (Phenylbutazone)
762. A patient diagnosed with atherosclerosis, ischemic heart disease, and rest angina pectoris was hospitalized into the cardiology department. Laboratory analysis shows high lipid levels in his blood plasma. What class of plasma lipids plays the main role in pathogenesis of atherosclerosis?
*a. Low-density lipoproteins
b. alpha-lipoproteins
c. High-density lipoproteins
d. Chylomicrons
e. Fatty acid-albumin complexes
763. A patient diagnosed with atherosclerosis, ischemic heart disease, and rest angina pectoris was hospitalized into the cardiology department. Laboratory analysis shows high lipid levels in his blood plasma. What class of plasma lipids plays the main role in pathogenesis of atherosclerosis?
a. Fatty acid-albumin complexes
*b. Low-density lipoproteins
c. alpha-lipoproteins
d. High-density lipoproteins
e. Chylomicrons
764. A patient diagnosed with atherosclerosis, ischemic heart disease, and rest angina pectoris was hospitalized into the cardiology department. Laboratory analysis shows high lipid levels in his blood plasma. What class of plasma lipids plays the main role in pathogenesis of atherosclerosis?
a. High-density lipoproteins
b. Fatty acid-albumin complexes
c. Chylomicrons
*d. Low-density lipoproteins
e. alpha-lipoproteins
765. A patient diagnosed with chronic myelogenous leukemia developed signs of necrotizing ulcerative stomatitis. Mucosal biopsy detected leukemic cells. In this case, oral cavity damage is associated with a certain link of tumor pathogenesis. Name this link.
*a. Tumor progression
b. Promotion
c. Initiation
d. Mutational mechanism of transformation
e. Epigenomic mechanism of transformation
766. A patient diagnosed with chronic myelogenous leukemia developed signs of necrotizing ulcerative stomatitis. Mucosal biopsy detected leukemic cells. In this case, oral cavity damage is associated with a certain link of tumor pathogenesis. Name this link.
a. Epigenomic mechanism of transformation
b. Mutational mechanism of transformation
c. Initiation
*d. Tumor progression
e. Promotion
767. A patient diagnosed with chronic myelogenous leukemia developed signs of necrotizing ulcerative stomatitis. Mucosal biopsy detected leukemic cells. In this case, oral cavity damage is associated with a certain link of tumor pathogenesis. Name this link.
a. Promotion
b. Epigenomic mechanism of transformation
*c. Tumor progression
d. Initiation
e. Mutational mechanism of transformation
768. A patient diagnosed with chronic renal failure developed anorexia, dyspepsia, heart rhythm disturbances, and skin itching. What is the main mechanism of development of these disorders?
*a. Accumulation of nitrogen metabolism products in the blood
b. Water-electrolyte imbalance
c. Changes in carbohydrate metabolism
d. Lipid metabolism disorders
e. Renal acidosis
769. A patient diagnosed with chronic renal failure developed anorexia, dyspepsia, heart rhythm disturbances, and skin itching. What is the main mechanism of development of these disorders?
a. Changes in carbohydrate metabolism
*b. Accumulation of nitrogen metabolism products in the blood
c. Lipid metabolism disorders
d. Water-electrolyte imbalance
e. Renal acidosis
770. A patient diagnosed with chronic renal failure developed anorexia, dyspepsia, heart rhythm disturbances, and skin itching. What is the main mechanism of development of these disorders?
a. Changes in carbohydrate metabolism
b. Water-electrolyte imbalance
c. Renal acidosis
d. Lipid metabolism disorders
*e. Accumulation of nitrogen metabolism products in the blood
771. A patient diagnosed with gout has a significant increase in the levels of uric acid in the blood. Uric acid is the end product of the metabolism of:
*a. Purine bases
b. Globulins
c. Fatty acids
d. Albumins
e. Triglycerides
772. A patient diagnosed with gout has a significant increase in the levels of uric acid in the blood. Uric acid is the end product of the metabolism of:
*a. Purine bases
b. Globulins
c. Triglycerides
d. Albumins
e. Fatty acids
773. A patient diagnosed with gout has a significant increase in the levels of uric acid in the blood. Uric acid is the end product of the metabolism of:
a. Albumins
b. Globulins
c. Triglycerides
d. Fatty acids
*e. Purine bases
774. A patient diagnosed with hepatic abscess was brought into the surgery department. He has a history of recurrent gastrointestinal disorders. Laboratory stool analysis detected round cells with 4 nuclei. What protozoal invasion can be detected in this case?
a. Balantidium coli
b. Trichomonas hominis
*c. Entamoeba hystolytica
d. Trichomonas vaginalis
e. Entamoeba gingivalis
775. A patient diagnosed with hepatic abscess was brought into the surgery department. He has a history of recurrent gastrointestinal disorders. Laboratory stool analysis detected round cells with 4 nuclei. What protozoal invasion can be detected in this case?
a. Entamoeba gingivalis
b. Trichomonas vaginalis
c. Balantidium coli
d. Trichomonas hominis
*e. Entamoeba hystolytica
776. A patient diagnosed with hepatic abscess was brought into the surgery department. He has a history of recurrent gastrointestinal disorders. Laboratory stool analysis detected round cells with 4 nuclei. What protozoal invasion can be detected in this case?
a. Trichomonas hominis
b. Entamoeba gingivalis
c. Trichomonas vaginalis
*d. Entamoeba hystolytica
e. Balantidium coli
777. A patient diagnosed with oral candidiasis was prescribed an antifungal drug. What drug was chosen for this patient?
*a. Fluconazole
b. Ampicillin
c. Levomycetin (Chloramphenicol)
d. Biseptol (Co-trimoxazole)
e. Erythromycin
778. A patient diagnosed with oral candidiasis was prescribed an antifungal drug. What drug was chosen for this patient?
*a. Fluconazole
b. Levomycetin (Chloramphenicol)
c. Ampicillin
d. Erythromycin
e. Biseptol (Co-trimoxazole)
779. A patient diagnosed with oral candidiasis was prescribed an antifungal drug. What drug was chosen for this patient?
a. Biseptol (Co-trimoxazole)
b. Ampicillin
c. Levomycetin (Chloramphenicol)
*d. Fluconazole
e. Erythromycin
780. A patient diagnosed with renal failure shows signs of renal osteodystrophy accompanied by resorption of periodontal bone tissue. This condition is caused by disturbed formation of:
*a. 1,25()_2 D_3
b. 25() D_3
c. D_2
d. 24, 25()_2 D_3
e. D_3
781. A patient diagnosed with renal failure shows signs of renal osteodystrophy accompanied by resorption of periodontal bone tissue. This condition is caused by disturbed formation of:
*a. 1,25()_2 D_3
b. D_3
c. 25() D_3
d. 24, 25()_2 D_3
e. D_2
782. A patient diagnosed with renal failure shows signs of renal osteodystrophy accompanied by resorption of periodontal bone tissue. This condition is caused by disturbed formation of:
a. D_3
*b. 1,25()_2 D_3
c. D_2
d. 25() D_3
e. 24, 25()_2 D_3
783. A patient diagnosed with stomatitis came to a dentist. Objectively, against the background of inflammatory reaction of the oral mucosa, increased salivation is observed, forcing the patient to spit constantly. What water-electrolyte metabolic imbalance is likely to develop in this case?
*a. Hyperosmolar hypohydration
b. Hyperosmolar hyperhydration
c. Hypoosmolar hyperhydration
d. Hypoosmolar hypohydration
e. There will be no water-electrolyte  metabolic imbalances
784. A patient diagnosed with stomatitis came to a dentist. Objectively, against the background of inflammatory reaction of the oral mucosa, increased salivation is observed, forcing the patient to spit constantly. What water-electrolyte metabolic imbalance is likely to develop in this case?
a. Hypoosmolar hyperhydration
b. There will be no water-electrolyte  metabolic imbalances
c. Hyperosmolar hyperhydration
*d. Hyperosmolar hypohydration
e. Hypoosmolar hypohydration
785. A patient diagnosed with stomatitis came to a dentist. Objectively, against the background of inflammatory reaction of the oral mucosa, increased salivation is observed, forcing the patient to spit constantly. What water-electrolyte metabolic imbalance is likely to develop in this case?
a. There will be no water-electrolyte  metabolic imbalances
b. Hypoosmolar hyperhydration
c. Hypoosmolar hypohydration
*d. Hyperosmolar hypohydration
e. Hyperosmolar hyperhydration
786. A patient diagnosed with systemic lupus erythematosus has kidney damage with nephrotic syndrome. What is the cause of this condition?
*a. Autoimmune damage to nephron glomeruli
b. Mechanical damage to the urinary tract
c. Hyperproteinemia
d. Ischemic kidney damage
e. Glomerulosclerosis
787. A patient diagnosed with systemic lupus erythematosus has kidney damage with nephrotic syndrome. What is the cause of this condition?
*a. Autoimmune damage to nephron glomeruli
b. Mechanical damage to the urinary tract
c. Ischemic kidney damage
d. Hyperproteinemia
e. Glomerulosclerosis
788. A patient diagnosed with systemic lupus erythematosus has kidney damage with nephrotic syndrome. What is the cause of this condition?
a. Ischemic kidney damage
b. Mechanical damage to the urinary tract
c. Glomerulosclerosis
d. Hyperproteinemia
*e. Autoimmune damage to nephron glomeruli
789. A patient died in the intensive care unit of multiple organ dysfunction syndrome. The patient had a history of surgery for acute purulent periostitis. Histology of necrobiopsy materials detects hyperplasia of tonsillar lymphoid tissue, diffuse neutrophil infiltration of the necrotically changed alveolar process of the jaw, regional purulent lymphadenitis, phlegmon of the soft tissues of the neck, bilateral polysegmental purulent pneumonia, splenomegaly, and irreversible changes in cardiomyocytes and epithelium of renal tubules. Postmortem bacteriology detected Staphylococcus aureus in the blood of the deceased. What type of sepsis is likely in the deceased patient?
a. Surgical
b. Cryptogenic
*c. Odontogenic
d. Therapeutic
e. Tonsilogenic
790. A patient died in the intensive care unit of multiple organ dysfunction syndrome. The patient had a history of surgery for acute purulent periostitis. Histology of necrobiopsy materials detects hyperplasia of tonsillar lymphoid tissue, diffuse neutrophil infiltration of the necrotically changed alveolar process of the jaw, regional purulent lymphadenitis, phlegmon of the soft tissues of the neck, bilateral polysegmental purulent pneumonia, splenomegaly, and irreversible changes in cardiomyocytes and epithelium of renal tubules. Postmortem bacteriology detected Staphylococcus aureus in the blood of the deceased. What type of sepsis is likely in the deceased patient?
a. Surgical
b. Therapeutic
c. Cryptogenic
*d. Odontogenic
e. Tonsilogenic
791. A patient died in the intensive care unit of multiple organ dysfunction syndrome. The patient had a history of surgery for acute purulent periostitis. Histology of necrobiopsy materials detects hyperplasia of tonsillar lymphoid tissue, diffuse neutrophil infiltration of the necrotically changed alveolar process of the jaw, regional purulent lymphadenitis, phlegmon of the soft tissues of the neck, bilateral polysegmental purulent pneumonia, splenomegaly, and irreversible changes in cardiomyocytes and epithelium of renal tubules. Postmortem bacteriology detected Staphylococcus aureus in the blood of the deceased. What type of sepsis is likely in the deceased patient?
a. Therapeutic
b. Tonsilogenic
*c. Odontogenic
d. Surgical
e. Cryptogenic
792. A patient died of a cardiopulmonary insufficiency. His heart is enlarged, the wall of his right ventricle is thickened on section, and the cavity is dilated. Characterize the pathological process:
a. Hyperplasia
b. Sclerosis
*c. Hypertrophy
d. Atrophy
e. Metaplasia
793. A patient died of a cardiopulmonary insufficiency. His heart is enlarged, the wall of his right ventricle is thickened on section, and the cavity is dilated. Characterize the pathological process:
a. Metaplasia
*b. Hypertrophy
c. Atrophy
d. Hyperplasia
e. Sclerosis
794. A patient died of a cardiopulmonary insufficiency. His heart is enlarged, the wall of his right ventricle is thickened on section, and the cavity is dilated. Characterize the pathological process:
a. Metaplasia
b. Hyperplasia
*c. Hypertrophy
d. Atrophy
e. Sclerosis
795. A patient had an angina pectoris attack during a visit to the dentist. What drug must be used in this case?
a. No-Spa (Drotaverine)
*b. Nitroglycerin
c. Nitrosorbide (Isosorbide dinitrate)
d. Verapamil
e. Propranolol
796. A patient had an angina pectoris attack during a visit to the dentist. What drug must be used in this case?
a. Propranolol
b. No-Spa (Drotaverine)
c. Verapamil
*d. Nitroglycerin
e. Nitrosorbide (Isosorbide dinitrate)
797. A patient had an angina pectoris attack during a visit to the dentist. What drug must be used in this case?
a. Verapamil
b. Propranolol
c. No-Spa (Drotaverine)
*d. Nitroglycerin
e. Nitrosorbide (Isosorbide dinitrate)
798. A patient has a deep incised wound on the back of his neck. What muscle is damaged in this case?
a. M. digastricus
b. M. mylohyoideus
c. M. levator scapulae
d. M. sternocleidomastoideus
*e. M. trapezius
799. A patient has a deep incised wound on the back of his neck. What muscle is damaged in this case?
a. M. sternocleidomastoideus
b. M. mylohyoideus
*c. M. trapezius
d. M. digastricus
e. M. levator scapulae
800. A patient has a deep incised wound on the back of his neck. What muscle is damaged in this case?
a. M. sternocleidomastoideus
b. M. mylohyoideus
c. M. levator scapulae
d. M. digastricus
*e. M. trapezius
801. A patient has a general sensitivity loss in separate areas of his body on the right. What cerebral gyrus is affected in this case?
a. Inferior temporal gyrus
b. Superior temporal gyrus
c. Middle temporal gyrus
d. Precentral gyrus
*e. Postcentral gyrus
802. A patient has a general sensitivity loss in separate areas of his body on the right. What cerebral gyrus is affected in this case?
a. Middle temporal gyrus
b. Inferior temporal gyrus
c. Superior temporal gyrus
d. Precentral gyrus
*e. Postcentral gyrus
803. A patient has a general sensitivity loss in separate areas of his body on the right. What cerebral gyrus is affected in this case?
a. Precentral gyrus
b. Inferior temporal gyrus
*c. Postcentral gyrus
d. Superior temporal gyrus
e. Middle temporal gyrus
804. A patient has a head trauma in the area of the suture between two parietal bones. What sinus of dura mater is likely to be damaged in this case?
*a. Superior sagittal sinus
b. Sigmoid sinus
c. Transverse sinus
d. Occipital sinus
e. Inferior sagittal sinus
805. A patient has a head trauma in the area of the suture between two parietal bones. What sinus of dura mater is likely to be damaged in this case?
a. Inferior sagittal sinus
b. Occipital sinus
*c. Superior sagittal sinus
d. Sigmoid sinus
e. Transverse sinus
806. A patient has a head trauma in the area of the suture between two parietal bones. What sinus of dura mater is likely to be damaged in this case?
a. Sigmoid sinus
*b. Superior sagittal sinus
c. Inferior sagittal sinus
d. Occipital sinus
e. Transverse sinus
807. A patient has a history of trauma followed by hemorrhagic bursitis of the left knee joint. During an examination 3 months later, limited mobility is observed in this joint because of scar formation. What inflammation component is the basis for the development of this complication?
a. Disturbed microcirculation
b. Exudation
c. Primary alteration
*d. Proliferation
e. Secondary alteration
808. A patient has a history of trauma followed by hemorrhagic bursitis of the left knee joint. During an examination 3 months later, limited mobility is observed in this joint because of scar formation. What inflammation component is the basis for the development of this complication?
a. Exudation
b. Secondary alteration
c. Primary alteration
d. Disturbed microcirculation
*e. Proliferation
809. A patient has a history of trauma followed by hemorrhagic bursitis of the left knee joint. During an examination 3 months later, limited mobility is observed in this joint because of scar formation. What inflammation component is the basis for the development of this complication?
a. Primary alteration
b. Exudation
c. Disturbed microcirculation
*d. Proliferation
e. Secondary alteration
810. A patient has a parotid gland inflammation. What nerve is involved in the inflammatory process in this case?
a. N. mandibularis
b. N. tympanicus
*c. N. facialis
d. N. linqualis
e. N. maxillaris
811. A patient has a parotid gland inflammation. What nerve is involved in the inflammatory process in this case?
a. N. maxillaris
b. N. linqualis
c. N. tympanicus
*d. N. facialis
e. N. mandibularis
812. A patient has a parotid gland inflammation. What nerve is involved in the inflammatory process in this case?
a. N. maxillaris
b. N. mandibularis
c. N. tympanicus
*d. N. facialis
e. N. linqualis
813. A patient has a penetrating wound of the oral diaphragm. What muscle must be sutured to restore the intactness of the floor of the mouth?
a. M. omohyoideus
b. M. stylohyoideus
c. M. platysma
*d. M. mylohyoideus
e. M. sternocleidomastoideus
814. A patient has a penetrating wound of the oral diaphragm. What muscle must be sutured to restore the intactness of the floor of the mouth?
a. M. platysma
b. M. stylohyoideus
c. M. sternocleidomastoideus
d. M. omohyoideus
*e. M. mylohyoideus
815. A patient has a penetrating wound of the oral diaphragm. What muscle must be sutured to restore the intactness of the floor of the mouth?
a. M. sternocleidomastoideus
b. M. stylohyoideus
c. M. omohyoideus
d. M. platysma
*e. M. mylohyoideus
816. A patient has a tumor in the left half of the medulla oblongata. Examination shows that the soft palate on the affected side sags, the pharyngeal reflex is reduced, the uvula deviates to the healthy side when making the sound "a", the voice is hoarse. What nerves are likely to be dysfunctional due to the tumor?
*a. Glossopharyngeal nerve and vagus
b. Vagus and accessory nerve
c. Accessory nerve and hypoglossal nerve
d. Glossopharyngeal nerve and facial nerve
e. Glossopharyngeal nerve and accessory nerve
817. A patient has a tumor in the left half of the medulla oblongata. Examination shows that the soft palate on the affected side sags, the pharyngeal reflex is reduced, the uvula deviates to the healthy side when making the sound "a", the voice is hoarse. What nerves are likely to be dysfunctional due to the tumor?
a. Glossopharyngeal nerve and accessory nerve
b. Glossopharyngeal nerve and facial nerve
c. Accessory nerve and hypoglossal nerve
d. Vagus and accessory nerve
*e. Glossopharyngeal nerve and vagus
818. A patient has a tumor in the left half of the medulla oblongata. Examination shows that the soft palate on the affected side sags, the pharyngeal reflex is reduced, the uvula deviates to the healthy side when making the sound "a", the voice is hoarse. What nerves are likely to be dysfunctional due to the tumor?
a. Glossopharyngeal nerve and facial nerve
b. Accessory nerve and hypoglossal nerve
*c. Glossopharyngeal nerve and vagus
d. Glossopharyngeal nerve and accessory nerve
e. Vagus and accessory nerve
819. A patient has an open facial wound with overhanging edges. He presents with tissue necrosis accompanied by a gradual partial gangrenous process that almost reaches the bone tissue. Live larvae were detected in the wound during a thorough examination. The patient was diagnosed with tissue myiasis, caused by larvae of a certain Diptera species. Name this species.
*a. Wohlfahrtia magnifica
b. Glossina palpalis
c. Musca domestica
d. Phlebotomus pappataci
e. Stomoxys calcitrans
820. A patient has an open facial wound with overhanging edges. He presents with tissue necrosis accompanied by a gradual partial gangrenous process that almost reaches the bone tissue. Live larvae were detected in the wound during a thorough examination. The patient was diagnosed with tissue myiasis, caused by larvae of a certain Diptera species. Name this species.
*a. Wohlfahrtia magnifica
b. Musca domestica
c. Glossina palpalis
d. Phlebotomus pappataci
e. Stomoxys calcitrans
821. A patient has an open facial wound with overhanging edges. He presents with tissue necrosis accompanied by a gradual partial gangrenous process that almost reaches the bone tissue. Live larvae were detected in the wound during a thorough examination. The patient was diagnosed with tissue myiasis, caused by larvae of a certain Diptera species. Name this species.
*a. Wohlfahrtia magnifica
b. Phlebotomus pappataci
c. Musca domestica
d. Glossina palpalis
e. Stomoxys calcitrans
822. A patient has arrhythmia. What medicine needs to be prescribed in this case?
a. Imizine (Imipramine)
b. Cavinton (Vinpocetine)
*c. Amiodarone
d. Nitroglycerine
e. Euphyllin (Aminophylline)
823. A patient has arrhythmia. What medicine needs to be prescribed in this case?
a. Imizine (Imipramine)
b. Cavinton (Vinpocetine)
c. Euphyllin (Aminophylline)
*d. Amiodarone
e. Nitroglycerine
824. A patient has arrhythmia. What medicine needs to be prescribed in this case?
a. Imizine (Imipramine)
b. Nitroglycerine
c. Cavinton (Vinpocetine)
*d. Amiodarone
e. Euphyllin (Aminophylline)
825. A patient has aspermia. What organ is dysfunctional in this case?
*a. Testicle
b. Seminal vesicles
c. Prostate
d. Epididymis
e. Bulbourethral (Cowper's) glands
826. A patient has aspermia. What organ is dysfunctional in this case?
a. Epididymis
b. Prostate
c. Bulbourethral (Cowper's) glands
d. Seminal vesicles
*e. Testicle
827. A patient has aspermia. What organ is dysfunctional in this case?
a. Prostate
*b. Testicle
c. Epididymis
d. Seminal vesicles
e. Bulbourethral (Cowper's) glands
828. A patient has been administered conduction anesthesia with novocaine in preparation for tooth extraction. After the anesthesia administration the patient developed swelling and hyperemy around the injection site, skin itch, general fatigue, motor agitation. Name the developed complication:
*a. Allergy
b. Idiosyncrasy
c. Inflammation
d. Drug dependence
e. Tachyphylaxis
829. A patient has been administered conduction anesthesia with novocaine in preparation for tooth extraction. After the anesthesia administration the patient developed swelling and hyperemy around the injection site, skin itch, general fatigue, motor agitation. Name the developed complication:
a. Drug dependence
b. Tachyphylaxis
*c. Allergy
d. Inflammation
e. Idiosyncrasy
830. A patient has been administered conduction anesthesia with novocaine in preparation for tooth extraction. After the anesthesia administration the patient developed swelling and hyperemy around the injection site, skin itch, general fatigue, motor agitation. Name the developed complication:
a. Idiosyncrasy
b. Tachyphylaxis
*c. Allergy
d. Drug dependence
e. Inflammation
831. A patient has been diagnosed with Vaquez disease (polycythemia vera). What is the cause of this pathology?
a. Hereditary defect
*b. Tumor damage to the progenitor cells of myelopoiesis
c. Redistribution of erythrocytes
d. Local renal hypoxia
e. Increased erythropoietin production
832. A patient has been diagnosed with Vaquez disease (polycythemia vera). What is the cause of this pathology?
a. Local renal hypoxia
b. Hereditary defect
c. Increased erythropoietin production
d. Redistribution of erythrocytes
*e. Tumor damage to the progenitor cells of myelopoiesis
833. A patient has been diagnosed with Vaquez disease (polycythemia vera). What is the cause of this pathology?
a. Local renal hypoxia
b. Increased erythropoietin production
*c. Tumor damage to the progenitor cells of myelopoiesis
d. Hereditary defect
e. Redistribution of erythrocytes
834. A patient has been diagnosed with a pathology accompanied by decreased levels of volatile metabolites in the internal environment of the body. Through what organs are they excreted?
*a. Lungs
b. -
c. Sebaceous glands
d. Kidneys
e. Sweat glands
835. A patient has been diagnosed with a pathology accompanied by decreased levels of volatile metabolites in the internal environment of the body. Through what organs are they excreted?
a. Kidneys
*b. Lungs
c. Sebaceous glands
d. Sweat glands
e. -
836. A patient has been diagnosed with a pathology accompanied by decreased levels of volatile metabolites in the internal environment of the body. Through what organs are they excreted?
a. Sebaceous glands
b. -
c. Sweat glands
d. Kidneys
*e. Lungs
837. A patient has been diagnosed with acute respiratory viral infection. Blood serum analysis detects class M immunoglobulins. What stage of the infectious process is observed in the patient in this case?
*a. Acute stage
b. Prodromal stage
c. Reconvalescence
d. Microbial carriage
e. Incubation
838. A patient has been diagnosed with acute respiratory viral infection. Blood serum analysis detects class M immunoglobulins. What stage of the infectious process is observed in the patient in this case?
a. Incubation
b. Prodromal stage
*c. Acute stage
d. Reconvalescence
e. Microbial carriage
839. A patient has been diagnosed with acute respiratory viral infection. Blood serum analysis detects class M immunoglobulins. What stage of the infectious process is observed in the patient in this case?
a. Incubation
b. Prodromal stage
c. Reconvalescence
*d. Acute stage
e. Microbial carriage
840. A patient has been diagnosed with mucopolysaccharidosis. What substances are typically deposited in various tissues of the body in this disease?
*a. Glycosaminoglycans
b. Triglycerides
c. Fructose
d. Glycogen
e. Fatty acids
841. A patient has been diagnosed with mucopolysaccharidosis. What substances are typically deposited in various tissues of the body in this disease?
a. Glycogen
*b. Glycosaminoglycans
c. Triglycerides
d. Fructose
e. Fatty acids
842. A patient has been diagnosed with mucopolysaccharidosis. What substances are typically deposited in various tissues of the body in this disease?
a. Glycogen
b. Triglycerides
c. Fatty acids
d. Fructose
*e. Glycosaminoglycans
843. A patient has been hospitalized in a severe general condition, with high temperature and difficulty breathing. Bacterioscopy of the material obtained from the patient's pharynx and airways allowed provisionally diagnosing the patient with diphtheritic croup. What staining technique was used in this case?
a. Ozheshko stain
b. Ziehl-Neelsen stain
*c. Neisser stain
d. Peshkov stain
e. Burri-Gins stain
844. A patient has been hospitalized in a severe general condition, with high temperature and difficulty breathing. Bacterioscopy of the material obtained from the patient's pharynx and airways allowed provisionally diagnosing the patient with diphtheritic croup. What staining technique was used in this case?
a. Ziehl-Neelsen stain
b. Ozheshko stain
c. Burri-Gins stain
d. Peshkov stain
*e. Neisser stain
845. A patient has been hospitalized in a severe general condition, with high temperature and difficulty breathing. Bacterioscopy of the material obtained from the patient's pharynx and airways allowed provisionally diagnosing the patient with diphtheritic croup. What staining technique was used in this case?
a. Ziehl-Neelsen stain
b. Peshkov stain
c. Burri-Gins stain
*d. Neisser stain
e. Ozheshko stain
846. A patient has been hospitalized with a rectal prolapse. Examination of the rectum detected small helminths detected attached to the mucosa. They resemble small whips with varying diameter of the body. Stool test revealed barrel-shaped eggs with bipolar plugs. What is the most likely causative agent of the disease?
*a. Trichuris trichiura
b. Entamoeba histolytica
c. Lamblia intestinalis
d. Ascaris lumbricoides
e. Enterobius vermicularis
847. A patient has been hospitalized with a rectal prolapse. Examination of the rectum detected small helminths detected attached to the mucosa. They resemble small whips with varying diameter of the body. Stool test revealed barrel-shaped eggs with bipolar plugs. What is the most likely causative agent of the disease?
a. Enterobius vermicularis
b. Ascaris lumbricoides
c. Lamblia intestinalis
d. Entamoeba histolytica
*e. Trichuris trichiura
848. A patient has been hospitalized with a rectal prolapse. Examination of the rectum detected small helminths detected attached to the mucosa. They resemble small whips with varying diameter of the body. Stool test revealed barrel-shaped eggs with bipolar plugs. What is the most likely causative agent of the disease?
a. Lamblia intestinalis
b. Enterobius vermicularis
c. Ascaris lumbricoides
d. Entamoeba histolytica
*e. Trichuris trichiura
849. A patient has been hospitalized with an injury to the occipital region. Examination detects a hemorrhage in the area of the calcarine sulcus. In this case, it  is likely that the cortical site of a certain analyzer is damaged. What analyzer is it?
*a. Visual
b. Auditory
c. Olfactory
d. Vestibular
e. Gustatory
850. A patient has been hospitalized with an injury to the occipital region. Examination detects a hemorrhage in the area of the calcarine sulcus. In this case, it  is likely that the cortical site of a certain analyzer is damaged. What analyzer is it?
*a. Visual
b. Vestibular
c. Auditory
d. Olfactory
e. Gustatory
851. A patient has been hospitalized with an injury to the occipital region. Examination detects a hemorrhage in the area of the calcarine sulcus. In this case, it  is likely that the cortical site of a certain analyzer is damaged. What analyzer is it?
a. Olfactory
*b. Visual
c. Auditory
d. Gustatory
e. Vestibular
852. A patient has been hospitalized with high nitrogen levels in the blood. What effect does nitrogen have in the human body, if its levels are high?
*a. Narcotic
b. Allergic
c. Toxic
d. Physical
e. Chemical
853. A patient has been hospitalized with high nitrogen levels in the blood. What effect does nitrogen have in the human body, if its levels are high?
*a. Narcotic
b. Chemical
c. Allergic
d. Physical
e. Toxic
854. A patient has been hospitalized with high nitrogen levels in the blood. What effect does nitrogen have in the human body, if its levels are high?
*a. Narcotic
b. Chemical
c. Physical
d. Toxic
e. Allergic
855. A patient has chronic multiple bronchiectasis complicated with severe nephropathy with massive edematous syndrome. Laboratory tests detect marked proteinuria, cylindruria, significant decrease of the serum protein levels, hyperlipidemia, hypokalemia, and other abnormalities. Name the primary and the most significant pathogenetic link of edema development in this patient:
*a. Decrease of oncotic blood pressure
b. Increase of extracellular fluid pressure
c. Increased microvascular permeability
d. Increase of hydrostatic blood pressure
e. Blocked lymphatic efflux
856. A patient has chronic multiple bronchiectasis complicated with severe nephropathy with massive edematous syndrome. Laboratory tests detect marked proteinuria, cylindruria, significant decrease of the serum protein levels, hyperlipidemia, hypokalemia, and other abnormalities. Name the primary and the most significant pathogenetic link of edema development in this patient:
a. Blocked lymphatic efflux
b. Increase of extracellular fluid pressure
c. Increase of hydrostatic blood pressure
d. Increased microvascular permeability
*e. Decrease of oncotic blood pressure
857. A patient has chronic multiple bronchiectasis complicated with severe nephropathy with massive edematous syndrome. Laboratory tests detect marked proteinuria, cylindruria, significant decrease of the serum protein levels, hyperlipidemia, hypokalemia, and other abnormalities. Name the primary and the most significant pathogenetic link of edema development in this patient:
a. Increase of hydrostatic blood pressure
b. Blocked lymphatic efflux
c. Increase of extracellular fluid pressure
d. Increased microvascular permeability
*e. Decrease of oncotic blood pressure
858. A patient has deep lacerated wound with uneven edges. The wound is suppurating; its edges present with moist granulation tissue that does not protrude above the wound level. Name the type of wound healing:
a. Healing under the scab
b. Healing by primary intention
*c. Healing by secondary intention
d. Direct closure of the epithelial defect
e. Wound organization
859. A patient has deep lacerated wound with uneven edges. The wound is suppurating; its edges present with moist granulation tissue that does not protrude above the wound level. Name the type of wound healing:
a. Healing under the scab
b. Wound organization
c. Direct closure of the epithelial defect
d. Healing by primary intention
*e. Healing by secondary intention
860. A patient has deep lacerated wound with uneven edges. The wound is suppurating; its edges present with moist granulation tissue that does not protrude above the wound level. Name the type of wound healing:
a. Healing under the scab
b. Wound organization
c. Healing by primary intention
d. Direct closure of the epithelial defect
*e. Healing by secondary intention
861. A patient has high body temperature, increased basal metabolic rate, and tachycardia at rest, which can be caused by hyperfunction of the:
*a. Thyroid gland
b. Adrenal cortex
c. Neurohypophysis
d. Gonads
e. Pancreas
862. A patient has high body temperature, increased basal metabolic rate, and tachycardia at rest, which can be caused by hyperfunction of the:
*a. Thyroid gland
b. Pancreas
c. Neurohypophysis
d. Gonads
e. Adrenal cortex
863. A patient has high body temperature, increased basal metabolic rate, and tachycardia at rest, which can be caused by hyperfunction of the:
a. Adrenal cortex
b. Neurohypophysis
*c. Thyroid gland
d. Pancreas
e. Gonads
864. A patient has high levels of blood aldosterone. What physiologically active substance is likely to have contributed to this condition?
*a. Angiotensin II
b. Prostaglandin E2
c. Cyclic adenosine monophosphate
d. Natriuretic factor
e. Cyclic guanosine monophosphate
865. A patient has high levels of blood aldosterone. What physiologically active substance is likely to have contributed to this condition?
a. Cyclic adenosine monophosphate
b. Prostaglandin E2
c. Cyclic guanosine monophosphate
*d. Angiotensin II
e. Natriuretic factor
866. A patient has high levels of blood aldosterone. What physiologically active substance is likely to have contributed to this condition?
a. Cyclic guanosine monophosphate
b. Natriuretic factor
c. Prostaglandin E2
*d. Angiotensin II
e. Cyclic adenosine monophosphate
867. A patient has markedly dilated subcutaneous veins in the area of the anterior abdominal wall around the umbilical region. In what vessel would there be elevated blood pressure, contributing to these symptoms?
a. V. cava superior
b. V. cava inferior
c. V. mesenterica superior
d. V. mesenterica inferior
*e. V. portae hepatis
868. A patient has markedly dilated subcutaneous veins in the area of the anterior abdominal wall around the umbilical region. In what vessel would there be elevated blood pressure, contributing to these symptoms?
a. V. mesenterica superior
b. V. cava inferior
c. V. cava superior
d. V. mesenterica inferior
*e. V. portae hepatis
869. A patient has received a trauma to the calvaria. What sinuses are likely to be damaged?
a. Inferior petrosal sinus
b. Sigmoid sinus
c. Superior petrosal sinus
d. Inferior sagittal sinus
*e. Superior sagittal sinus
870. A patient has received a trauma to the calvaria. What sinuses are likely to be damaged?
a. Sigmoid sinus
b. Inferior sagittal sinus
*c. Superior sagittal sinus
d. Superior petrosal sinus
e. Inferior petrosal sinus
871. A patient has received a trauma to the calvaria. What sinuses are likely to be damaged?
a. Sigmoid sinus
b. Superior petrosal sinus
c. Inferior sagittal sinus
*d. Superior sagittal sinus
e. Inferior petrosal sinus
872. A patient has suffered a head injury. On examination there is a subcutaneous hematoma in the temporal area. What vessel was damaged, thus resulting in the hematoma development?
a. . auricularis posterior
b. . maxillaris
c. . buccalis
*d. . temporalis superficialis
e. . occipitalis
873. A patient has suffered a head injury. On examination there is a subcutaneous hematoma in the temporal area. What vessel was damaged, thus resulting in the hematoma development?
a. . buccalis
b. . maxillaris
c. . occipitalis
*d. . temporalis superficialis
e. . auricularis posterior
874. A patient has suffered a head injury. On examination there is a subcutaneous hematoma in the temporal area. What vessel was damaged, thus resulting in the hematoma development?
a. . occipitalis
b. . auricularis posterior
*c. . temporalis superficialis
d. . buccalis
e. . maxillaris
875. A patient has torticollis. What muscle of the neck is damaged?
*a. M. Sternocleidomastoideus
b. M. Mylohyoideus
c. M. Sternohyoideus
d. M. Platisma
e. M. Omohyoideus
876. A patient has torticollis. What muscle of the neck is damaged?
a. M. Omohyoideus
b. M. Platisma
c. M. Sternohyoideus
d. M. Mylohyoideus
*e. M. Sternocleidomastoideus
877. A patient has torticollis. What muscle of the neck is damaged?
a. M. Omohyoideus
b. M. Sternohyoideus
c. M. Platisma
*d. M. Sternocleidomastoideus
e. M. Mylohyoideus
878. A patient is diagnosed with a displaced fracture of the coronoid process of the mandible. What muscle will displace the coronoid process?
*a. Temporal
b. Lateral pterygoid muscle
c. Masseter
d. Medial pterygoid muscle
e. -
879. A patient is diagnosed with a displaced fracture of the coronoid process of the mandible. What muscle will displace the coronoid process?
a. Lateral pterygoid muscle
b. Medial pterygoid muscle
c. Masseter
*d. Temporal
e. -
880. A patient is diagnosed with a displaced fracture of the coronoid process of the mandible. What muscle will displace the coronoid process?
a. Medial pterygoid muscle
b. Lateral pterygoid muscle
c. Masseter
d. -
*e. Temporal
881. A patient is diagnosed with deformed posterior portion of the nasal septum. What bone is deformed?
a. Medial pterygoid plate
*b. Vomer
c. Vertical plate of palatine bone
d. Lateral pterygoid plate
e. Perpendicular plate of ethmoid bone
882. A patient is diagnosed with deformed posterior portion of the nasal septum. What bone is deformed?
a. Medial pterygoid plate
b. Lateral pterygoid plate
*c. Vomer
d. Perpendicular plate of ethmoid bone
e. Vertical plate of palatine bone
883. A patient is diagnosed with deformed posterior portion of the nasal septum. What bone is deformed?
a. Perpendicular plate of ethmoid bone
b. Lateral pterygoid plate
*c. Vomer
d. Medial pterygoid plate
e. Vertical plate of palatine bone
884. A patient is diagnosed with maxillary sinusitis. Into what anatomical structure will the pus flow from the inflamed paranasal sinus?
a. -
b. Common nasal meatus
*c. Middle nasal meatus
d. Inferior nasal meatus
e. Superior nasal meatus
885. A patient is diagnosed with maxillary sinusitis. Into what anatomical structure will the pus flow from the inflamed paranasal sinus?
a. -
b. Superior nasal meatus
c. Inferior nasal meatus
d. Common nasal meatus
*e. Middle nasal meatus
886. A patient is diagnosed with maxillary sinusitis. Into what anatomical structure will the pus flow from the inflamed paranasal sinus?
a. Common nasal meatus
*b. Middle nasal meatus
c. Inferior nasal meatus
d. -
e. Superior nasal meatus
887. A patient is diagnosed with parathyroid tumor. He presents with generalized fibrous osteodystrophy and periodical renal colic attacks. US detects small nephroliths in the kidneys. What is the most likely cause of nephrolithiasis in this case?
*a. Hypercalcemia
b. Hypocalcemia
c. Hypercholesterolemia
d. Hyperuricemia
e. Hyperphosphatemia
888. A patient is diagnosed with parathyroid tumor. He presents with generalized fibrous osteodystrophy and periodical renal colic attacks. US detects small nephroliths in the kidneys. What is the most likely cause of nephrolithiasis in this case?
a. Hypercholesterolemia
b. Hypocalcemia
c. Hyperphosphatemia
*d. Hypercalcemia
e. Hyperuricemia
889. A patient is diagnosed with parathyroid tumor. He presents with generalized fibrous osteodystrophy and periodical renal colic attacks. US detects small nephroliths in the kidneys. What is the most likely cause of nephrolithiasis in this case?
a. Hypocalcemia
b. Hyperphosphatemia
c. Hypercholesterolemia
d. Hyperuricemia
*e. Hypercalcemia
890. A patient is diagnosed with pneumonia of mycoplasmal etiology. What antibiotics, based on their mechanism of action, \textbfSHOULD NOT be used in the course of the treatment?
*a. Antibiotics that inhibit the synthesis of cell wall components
b. Antibiotics that disturb the permeability of cytoplasmic membrane
c. Antibiotics that disturb oxidative phosphorylation processes
d. Antibiotics that disturb the synthesis of nucleic acids
e. Antibiotics that disturb the protein synthesis
891. A patient is diagnosed with pneumonia of mycoplasmal etiology. What antibiotics, based on their mechanism of action, \textbfSHOULD NOT be used in the course of the treatment?
*a. Antibiotics that inhibit the synthesis of cell wall components
b. Antibiotics that disturb the synthesis of nucleic acids
c. Antibiotics that disturb the permeability of cytoplasmic membrane
d. Antibiotics that disturb oxidative phosphorylation processes
e. Antibiotics that disturb the protein synthesis
892. A patient is diagnosed with pneumonia of mycoplasmal etiology. What antibiotics, based on their mechanism of action, \textbfSHOULD NOT be used in the course of the treatment?
a. Antibiotics that disturb oxidative phosphorylation processes
b. Antibiotics that disturb the synthesis of nucleic acids
c. Antibiotics that disturb the permeability of cytoplasmic membrane
*d. Antibiotics that inhibit the synthesis of cell wall components
e. Antibiotics that disturb the protein synthesis
893. A patient is diagnosed with stomatitis caused by herpes simplex virus,type 1 and 2.What medicine that is an analogue of nucleosides and is converted by thymidine kinase can provide highly effective selective antiviral therapy?
a. Acetylcysteine
b. Rimantadine
c. Laferon (recombinant human interferon alpha-2b)
*d. Acyclovir
e. Oxolin (Dioxotetrahydrooxytetrahydro-naphthaline)
894. A patient is diagnosed with stomatitis caused by herpes simplex virus,type 1 and 2.What medicine that is an analogue of nucleosides and is converted by thymidine kinase can provide highly effective selective antiviral therapy?
a. Oxolin (Dioxotetrahydrooxytetrahydro-naphthaline)
b. Acetylcysteine
*c. Acyclovir
d. Rimantadine
e. Laferon (recombinant human interferon alpha-2b)
895. A patient is diagnosed with stomatitis caused by herpes simplex virus,type 1 and 2.What medicine that is an analogue of nucleosides and is converted by thymidine kinase can provide highly effective selective antiviral therapy?
a. Rimantadine
b. Oxolin (Dioxotetrahydrooxytetrahydro-naphthaline)
c. Acetylcysteine
d. Laferon (recombinant human interferon alpha-2b)
*e. Acyclovir
896. A patient is registered for regular check-ups. Laboratory analyses for viral hepatitis diagnostics are made. In the blood serum only antibodies to HbsAg are detected. Such result is indicative of:
*a. Past case of viral hepatitis type B
b. Acute viral hepatitis type B
c. Acute viral hepatitis type C
d. Chronic viral hepatitis type C
e. Viral hepatitis type A
897. A patient is registered for regular check-ups. Laboratory analyses for viral hepatitis diagnostics are made. In the blood serum only antibodies to HbsAg are detected. Such result is indicative of:
*a. Past case of viral hepatitis type B
b. Acute viral hepatitis type C
c. Chronic viral hepatitis type C
d. Viral hepatitis type A
e. Acute viral hepatitis type B
898. A patient is registered for regular check-ups. Laboratory analyses for viral hepatitis diagnostics are made. In the blood serum only antibodies to HbsAg are detected. Such result is indicative of:
a. Acute viral hepatitis type C
*b. Past case of viral hepatitis type B
c. Chronic viral hepatitis type C
d. Viral hepatitis type A
e. Acute viral hepatitis type B
899. A patient is undergoing a surgery for a trauma of the temporomandibular joint. An incision revealed a structure that improves the congruence of joint surfaces. Name this structure:
a. Fold
*b. Disc
c. Meniscus
d. Ligament
e. Lip
900. A patient is undergoing a surgery for a trauma of the temporomandibular joint. An incision revealed a structure that improves the congruence of joint surfaces. Name this structure:
a. Fold
b. Lip
c. Meniscus
d. Ligament
*e. Disc
901. A patient is undergoing a surgery for a trauma of the temporomandibular joint. An incision revealed a structure that improves the congruence of joint surfaces. Name this structure:
a. Meniscus
b. Ligament
*c. Disc
d. Lip
e. Fold
902. A patient loses his equilibrium, when in an upright position with his eyes closed. What brain structures are the most likely to be damaged in this patient?
*a. Cerebellum
b. Basal ganglia
c. Limbic system
d. Precentral gyrus of the cerebral cortex
e. Thalamus
903. A patient loses his equilibrium, when in an upright position with his eyes closed. What brain structures are the most likely to be damaged in this patient?
a. Basal ganglia
b. Thalamus
*c. Cerebellum
d. Limbic system
e. Precentral gyrus of the cerebral cortex
904. A patient loses his equilibrium, when in an upright position with his eyes closed. What brain structures are the most likely to be damaged in this patient?
a. Precentral gyrus of the cerebral cortex
b. Limbic system
c. Basal ganglia
d. Thalamus
*e. Cerebellum
905. A patient needs a surgery on the cervical part of the trachea. Through what part of the neck will the surgeon access the trachea?
*a. Omotracheal triangle
b. Lingual triangle
c. Omotrapezoid triangle
d. Submandibular triangle
e. Carotid triangle
906. A patient needs a surgery on the cervical part of the trachea. Through what part of the neck will the surgeon access the trachea?
a. Carotid triangle
b. Omotrapezoid triangle
c. Submandibular triangle
d. Lingual triangle
*e. Omotracheal triangle
907. A patient needs a surgery on the cervical part of the trachea. Through what part of the neck will the surgeon access the trachea?
a. Submandibular triangle
*b. Omotracheal triangle
c. Omotrapezoid triangle
d. Lingual triangle
e. Carotid triangle
908. A patient needs his tongue to be amputated due to a malignant tumor located there. Where can one easily find the lingual artery and ligate it?
*a. Pirogov triangle
b. Omotrapezoid triangle
c. Omoclavicular triangle
d. Carotid triangle
e. Omotracheal triangle
909. A patient needs his tongue to be amputated due to a malignant tumor located there. Where can one easily find the lingual artery and ligate it?
*a. Pirogov triangle
b. Omotrapezoid triangle
c. Omoclavicular triangle
d. Omotracheal triangle
e. Carotid triangle
910. A patient needs his tongue to be amputated due to a malignant tumor located there. Where can one easily find the lingual artery and ligate it?
a. Omotrapezoid triangle
b. Omoclavicular triangle
c. Omotracheal triangle
*d. Pirogov triangle
e. Carotid triangle
911. A patient needs to be prescribed a broad-spectrum fluoroquinolone. Select such drug from the list below:
*a. Ciprofloxacin
b. Chinoxydin
c. Carbenicillin
d. Amoxicillin
e. Azlocillin
912. A patient needs to be prescribed a broad-spectrum fluoroquinolone. Select such drug from the list below:
a. Amoxicillin
b. Azlocillin
c. Carbenicillin
*d. Ciprofloxacin
e. Chinoxydin
913. A patient needs to be prescribed a broad-spectrum fluoroquinolone. Select such drug from the list below:
a. Chinoxydin
*b. Ciprofloxacin
c. Amoxicillin
d. Carbenicillin
e. Azlocillin
914. A patient of tall stature with drooping lower lip, big nose, and large extremities has made an appointment with the doctor. What gland is likely to present with excessive secretion in this patient?
a. -
b. Parathyroid glands
c. Pineal gland
*d. Anterior lobe of the pituitary gland
e. Thyroid gland
915. A patient of tall stature with drooping lower lip, big nose, and large extremities has made an appointment with the doctor. What gland is likely to present with excessive secretion in this patient?
a. Pineal gland
*b. Anterior lobe of the pituitary gland
c. Parathyroid glands
d. Thyroid gland
e. -
916. A patient of tall stature with drooping lower lip, big nose, and large extremities has made an appointment with the doctor. What gland is likely to present with excessive secretion in this patient?
a. Thyroid gland
b. -
c. Pineal gland
d. Parathyroid glands
*e. Anterior lobe of the pituitary gland
917. A patient on examination presents with prolonged I heart sound. This heart sound occurs as the result of:
*a. Closing of the atrioventricular valves
b. Opening of the tricuspid valve
c. Opening of the mitral valve
d. Closing of the pulmonary valve
e. Closing of the aortic valve
918. A patient on examination presents with prolonged I heart sound. This heart sound occurs as the result of:
a. Opening of the mitral valve
b. Closing of the aortic valve
c. Closing of the pulmonary valve
*d. Closing of the atrioventricular valves
e. Opening of the tricuspid valve
919. A patient on examination presents with prolonged I heart sound. This heart sound occurs as the result of:
a. Opening of the tricuspid valve
b. Closing of the aortic valve
*c. Closing of the atrioventricular valves
d. Opening of the mitral valve
e. Closing of the pulmonary valve
920. A patient on the 2nd day after cardiac infarction presents with acute decrease of systolic blood pressure down to 60 mm Hg with tachycardia 140/min., dyspnea, loss of consciousness. What mechanism is essential in the pathogenesis of shock developed in this case?
*a. Decreased cardiac output
b. Increased myocardial excitability caused by products of    necrotic disintegration
c. Development of paroxysmal tachycardia
d. Decreased circulating blood volume
e. Development of anaphylactic reaction to myocardial proteins
921. A patient on the 2nd day after cardiac infarction presents with acute decrease of systolic blood pressure down to 60 mm Hg with tachycardia 140/min., dyspnea, loss of consciousness. What mechanism is essential in the pathogenesis of shock developed in this case?
a. Development of paroxysmal tachycardia
b. Development of anaphylactic reaction to myocardial proteins
c. Increased myocardial excitability caused by products of    necrotic disintegration
d. Decreased circulating blood volume
*e. Decreased cardiac output
922. A patient presents with acute onset of the disease: high fever and enlarged painful spleen. On the 10th day since the onset the patient developed a maculopapular rash on the abdomen. On the 21st day the patient died of peritonitis. Postmortem study of the body shows deep ulcers in the area of necrotic aggregate lymphoid follicles (Peyer's patches) in the ileum of the deceased. One of the ulcers is perforated and diffuse fibrinopurulent peritonitis is observed. What disease can be suspected in this case?
*a. Typhoid fever
b. Dysentery
c. Cholera
d. Salmonellosis
e. Intestinal amebiasis
923. A patient presents with acute onset of the disease: high fever and enlarged painful spleen. On the 10th day since the onset the patient developed a maculopapular rash on the abdomen. On the 21st day the patient died of peritonitis. Postmortem study of the body shows deep ulcers in the area of necrotic aggregate lymphoid follicles (Peyer's patches) in the ileum of the deceased. One of the ulcers is perforated and diffuse fibrinopurulent peritonitis is observed. What disease can be suspected in this case?
*a. Typhoid fever
b. Salmonellosis
c. Intestinal amebiasis
d. Cholera
e. Dysentery
924. A patient presents with acute onset of the disease: high fever and enlarged painful spleen. On the 10th day since the onset the patient developed a maculopapular rash on the abdomen. On the 21st day the patient died of peritonitis. Postmortem study of the body shows deep ulcers in the area of necrotic aggregate lymphoid follicles (Peyer's patches) in the ileum of the deceased. One of the ulcers is perforated and diffuse fibrinopurulent peritonitis is observed. What disease can be suspected in this case?
a. Intestinal amebiasis
*b. Typhoid fever
c. Cholera
d. Dysentery
e. Salmonellosis
925. A patient presents with aspermia. What organ is functionally disturbed?
*a. Testicle
b. Prostate
c. Seminal vesicles
d. -
e. Epididymis
926. A patient presents with aspermia. What organ is functionally disturbed?
a. -
*b. Testicle
c. Seminal vesicles
d. Prostate
e. Epididymis
927. A patient presents with aspermia. What organ is functionally disturbed?
a. Seminal vesicles
b. -
c. Epididymis
d. Prostate
*e. Testicle
928. A patient presents with damaged fibers of the ninth pair of cranial nerves (glossopharyngeal nerve). What gustatory sensation will be disturbed in this case?
a. All gustatory sensations
*b. Bitterness
c. Sweetness
d. Saltiness
e. Sourness
929. A patient presents with damaged fibers of the ninth pair of cranial nerves (glossopharyngeal nerve). What gustatory sensation will be disturbed in this case?
a. All gustatory sensations
b. Sweetness
*c. Bitterness
d. Sourness
e. Saltiness
930. A patient presents with damaged fibers of the ninth pair of cranial nerves (glossopharyngeal nerve). What gustatory sensation will be disturbed in this case?
a. Saltiness
b. All gustatory sensations
*c. Bitterness
d. Sweetness
e. Sourness
931. A patient presents with disturbed blood supply to the medial surface of the right cerebral hemisphere. What artery is damaged in this case?
*a. A. cerebri anterior
b. A. cerebri posterior
c. A. chorioidea
d. A. cerebri media
e. A. communicans posterior
932. A patient presents with disturbed blood supply to the medial surface of the right cerebral hemisphere. What artery is damaged in this case?
a. A. cerebri media
b. A. communicans posterior
c. A. chorioidea
d. A. cerebri posterior
*e. A. cerebri anterior
933. A patient presents with disturbed blood supply to the medial surface of the right cerebral hemisphere. What artery is damaged in this case?
a. A. cerebri posterior
*b. A. cerebri anterior
c. A. communicans posterior
d. A. chorioidea
e. A. cerebri media
934. A patient presents with disturbed patency of the airways at the level of small and medium bronchial tubes. What acid-base imbalance can the patient develop?
*a. Respiratory acidosis
b. Acid-base balance remains unchanged
c. Respiratory alkalosis
d. Metabolic alkalosis
e. Metabolic acidosis
935. A patient presents with disturbed patency of the airways at the level of small and medium bronchial tubes. What acid-base imbalance can the patient develop?
a. Acid-base balance remains unchanged
b. Metabolic alkalosis
*c. Respiratory acidosis
d. Metabolic acidosis
e. Respiratory alkalosis
936. A patient presents with disturbed patency of the airways at the level of small and medium bronchial tubes. What acid-base imbalance can the patient develop?
a. Metabolic alkalosis
*b. Respiratory acidosis
c. Acid-base balance remains unchanged
d. Respiratory alkalosis
e. Metabolic acidosis
937. A patient presents with disturbed patency of the respiratory tracts at the level of small and medium bronchi. What acid-base imbalance is likely to be detected in the patient's blood in this case?
a. -
b. Metabolic acidosis
*c. Respiratory acidosis
d. Respiratory alkalosis
e. Metabolic alkalosis
938. A patient presents with disturbed patency of the respiratory tracts at the level of small and medium bronchi. What acid-base imbalance is likely to be detected in the patient's blood in this case?
a. Metabolic acidosis
b. Metabolic alkalosis
c. -
*d. Respiratory acidosis
e. Respiratory alkalosis
939. A patient presents with disturbed patency of the respiratory tracts at the level of small and medium bronchi. What acid-base imbalance is likely to be detected in the patient's blood in this case?
a. Respiratory alkalosis
b. -
*c. Respiratory acidosis
d. Metabolic acidosis
e. Metabolic alkalosis
940. A patient presents with dysfunction of the cerebral cortex accompanied by epileptic seizures. He has been administered a biogenic amine synthetized from glutamate and responsible for central inhibition. What substance is it?
*a. \gamma-aminobutyric acid
b. Serotonin
c. Histamine
d. Dopamine
e. Acetylcholine
941. A patient presents with dysfunction of the cerebral cortex accompanied by epileptic seizures. He has been administered a biogenic amine synthetized from glutamate and responsible for central inhibition. What substance is it?
a. Acetylcholine
*b. \gamma-aminobutyric acid
c. Dopamine
d. Histamine
e. Serotonin
942. A patient presents with dysfunction of the cerebral cortex accompanied by epileptic seizures. He has been administered a biogenic amine synthetized from glutamate and responsible for central inhibition. What substance is it?
a. Serotonin
b. Acetylcholine
*c. \gamma-aminobutyric acid
d. Dopamine
e. Histamine
943. A patient presents with high content of vasopressin (antidiuretic hormone) in the blood. What changes in the patient's diuresis will occur?
a. Glycosuria
b. Natriuria
c. Polyuria
d. Anuria
*e. Oliguria
944. A patient presents with high content of vasopressin (antidiuretic hormone) in the blood. What changes in the patient's diuresis will occur?
a. Natriuria
b. Polyuria
c. Glycosuria
*d. Oliguria
e. Anuria
945. A patient presents with high content of vasopressin (antidiuretic hormone) in the blood. What changes in the patient's diuresis will occur?
a. Polyuria
*b. Oliguria
c. Natriuria
d. Glycosuria
e. Anuria
946. A patient presents with impaired absorption of fats. A doctor prescribed the patient a bile preparation to improve the digestion of fatty foods. What bile components take part in this process?
*a. Bile acid salts
b. Bilirubin glucuronides
c. Diglycerides
d. Cholesterol and its ethers
e. Saturated fatty acids
947. A patient presents with impaired absorption of fats. A doctor prescribed the patient a bile preparation to improve the digestion of fatty foods. What bile components take part in this process?
a. Cholesterol and its ethers
*b. Bile acid salts
c. Bilirubin glucuronides
d. Diglycerides
e. Saturated fatty acids
948. A patient presents with impaired absorption of fats. A doctor prescribed the patient a bile preparation to improve the digestion of fatty foods. What bile components take part in this process?
a. Diglycerides
b. Saturated fatty acids
c. Bilirubin glucuronides
*d. Bile acid salts
e. Cholesterol and its ethers
949. A patient presents with osteoporosis; hypercalcemia and hypophosphatemia are observed in the patient's blood. What is the cause of this condition?
a. Increased corticosteroid secretion
b. Inhibited parathormone secretion
c. Increased thyroxin secretion
*d. Increased parathormone secretion
e. Inhibited corticosteroid secretion
950. A patient presents with osteoporosis; hypercalcemia and hypophosphatemia are observed in the patient's blood. What is the cause of this condition?
a. Increased thyroxin secretion
b. Inhibited parathormone secretion
c. Inhibited corticosteroid secretion
*d. Increased parathormone secretion
e. Increased corticosteroid secretion
951. A patient presents with osteoporosis; hypercalcemia and hypophosphatemia are observed in the patient's blood. What is the cause of this condition?
a. Inhibited corticosteroid secretion
b. Increased thyroxin secretion
c. Increased corticosteroid secretion
d. Inhibited parathormone secretion
*e. Increased parathormone secretion
952. A patient suffering from acute bronchitis with difficult expectoration was prescribed acetylcysteine. What drug action will provide curative effect?
*a. Mucoproteins depolymerization
b. Reflex stimulation of bronchiolar peristalsis
c. Stimulation of the bronchial glands
d. Activation of bronchial ciliated epithelium
e. Alkalinization of sputum
953. A patient suffering from acute bronchitis with difficult expectoration was prescribed acetylcysteine. What drug action will provide curative effect?
a. Alkalinization of sputum
b. Reflex stimulation of bronchiolar peristalsis
c. Activation of bronchial ciliated epithelium
*d. Mucoproteins depolymerization
e. Stimulation of the bronchial glands
954. A patient suffering from ciliary arrhythmia with anamnesis of bronchial asthma should be prescribed an antiarrhythmic drug. What antiarrhythmic drug is \textbfCONTRAINDICATED in this case?
a. Ajmaline
b. Novocainamide (Procainamide)
*c. Anaprilin (Propranolol)
d. Nifedipine
e. Verapamil
955. A patient suffering from ciliary arrhythmia with anamnesis of bronchial asthma should be prescribed an antiarrhythmic drug. What antiarrhythmic drug is \textbfCONTRAINDICATED in this case?
a. Nifedipine
*b. Anaprilin (Propranolol)
c. Verapamil
d. Novocainamide (Procainamide)
e. Ajmaline
956. A patient suffering from ciliary arrhythmia with anamnesis of bronchial asthma should be prescribed an antiarrhythmic drug. What antiarrhythmic drug is \textbfCONTRAINDICATED in this case?
a. Novocainamide (Procainamide)
b. Verapamil
*c. Anaprilin (Propranolol)
d. Ajmaline
e. Nifedipine
957. A patient suffers from angina pectoris. What antianginal drug is this patient \textbfCONTRAINDICATED if he is allergic to iodine?
a. Drotaverine
*b. Amiodarone
c. Nitrosorbide (Isosorbide dinitrate)
d. Nitroglycerine
e. Verapamil
958. A patient suffers from angina pectoris. What antianginal drug is this patient \textbfCONTRAINDICATED if he is allergic to iodine?
a. Nitrosorbide (Isosorbide dinitrate)
*b. Amiodarone
c. Verapamil
d. Drotaverine
e. Nitroglycerine
959. A patient suffers from angina pectoris. What antianginal drug is this patient \textbfCONTRAINDICATED if he is allergic to iodine?
a. Nitrosorbide (Isosorbide dinitrate)
b. Drotaverine
c. Verapamil
*d. Amiodarone
e. Nitroglycerine
960. A patient suffers from diabetes mellitus with fasting hyperglycemia over 7.2 mmol/L. What blood plasma protein would allow to assess the patient's glycemia level retrospectively (4-8 weeks prior to examination)?
*a. Glycated hemoglobin
b. Ceruloplasmin
c. Albumin
d. C-reactive protein
e. Fibrinogen
961. A patient suffers from diabetes mellitus with fasting hyperglycemia over 7.2 mmol/L. What blood plasma protein would allow to assess the patient's glycemia level retrospectively (4-8 weeks prior to examination)?
a. Ceruloplasmin
*b. Glycated hemoglobin
c. Fibrinogen
d. C-reactive protein
e. Albumin
962. A patient suffers from diabetes mellitus with fasting hyperglycemia over 7.2 mmol/L. What blood plasma protein would allow to assess the patient's glycemia level retrospectively (4-8 weeks prior to examination)?
a. Ceruloplasmin
b. C-reactive protein
c. Albumin
d. Fibrinogen
*e. Glycated hemoglobin
963. A patient suffers from disturbed blood supply of superior lateral surface of the cerebral hemispheres. What blood vessel is damaged?
*a. Medial cerebral artery
b. Posterior communicating artery
c. Anterior cerebral artery
d. Posterior cerebral artery
e. Anterior communicating artery
964. A patient suffers from disturbed blood supply of superior lateral surface of the cerebral hemispheres. What blood vessel is damaged?
a. Posterior cerebral artery
*b. Medial cerebral artery
c. Posterior communicating artery
d. Anterior cerebral artery
e. Anterior communicating artery
965. A patient suffers from disturbed blood supply of superior lateral surface of the cerebral hemispheres. What blood vessel is damaged?
a. Posterior cerebral artery
b. Anterior communicating artery
c. Posterior communicating artery
d. Anterior cerebral artery
*e. Medial cerebral artery
966. A patient suffers from disturbed ocular accommodation. What muscle is damaged?
*a. Musculus ciliaris
b. Musculus sphincter pupillae
c. Musculus rectus inferior
d. Musculus dilatator pupillae
e. Musculus rectus superior
967. A patient suffers from disturbed ocular accommodation. What muscle is damaged?
a. Musculus rectus superior
b. Musculus dilatator pupillae
*c. Musculus ciliaris
d. Musculus rectus inferior
e. Musculus sphincter pupillae
968. A patient suffers from disturbed ocular accommodation. What muscle is damaged?
a. Musculus rectus superior
b. Musculus sphincter pupillae
*c. Musculus ciliaris
d. Musculus dilatator pupillae
e. Musculus rectus inferior
969. A patient suffers from meningitis. He is prescribed a subarachnoid space puncture. Where is this space located?
*a. Between arachnoid mater and pia mater
b. Between dura mater and arachnoid mater
c. Between periosteum and arachnoid mater
d. Between periosteum and dura mater
e. -
970. A patient suffers from meningitis. He is prescribed a subarachnoid space puncture. Where is this space located?
a. -
*b. Between arachnoid mater and pia mater
c. Between periosteum and arachnoid mater
d. Between periosteum and dura mater
e. Between dura mater and arachnoid mater
971. A patient suffers from meningitis. He is prescribed a subarachnoid space puncture. Where is this space located?
a. -
b. Between periosteum and arachnoid mater
c. Between dura mater and arachnoid mater
*d. Between arachnoid mater and pia mater
e. Between periosteum and dura mater
972. A patient undergoes a surgery for a knee joint injury. The surgical incision reveals formations that improve the congruence of articular surfaces. What are these formations called?
a. Folds
b. Labia
c. Discs
d. Ligaments
*e. Menisci
973. A patient undergoes a surgery for a knee joint injury. The surgical incision reveals formations that improve the congruence of articular surfaces. What are these formations called?
a. Ligaments
*b. Menisci
c. Folds
d. Labia
e. Discs
974. A patient undergoes a surgery for a knee joint injury. The surgical incision reveals formations that improve the congruence of articular surfaces. What are these formations called?
a. Ligaments
b. Folds
*c. Menisci
d. Labia
e. Discs
975. A patient underwent a glucose tolerance test that confirmed the absence of diabetes mellitus in this person. When, after a sugar load, a healthy person will have the highest glucose levels?
*a. 30-60 minutes
b. 10-20 minutes
c. 120 minutes
d. 90 minutes
e. 150 minutes
976. A patient underwent a glucose tolerance test that confirmed the absence of diabetes mellitus in this person. When, after a sugar load, a healthy person will have the highest glucose levels?
a. 120 minutes
b. 90 minutes
*c. 30-60 minutes
d. 10-20 minutes
e. 150 minutes
977. A patient underwent a glucose tolerance test that confirmed the absence of diabetes mellitus in this person. When, after a sugar load, a healthy person will have the highest glucose levels?
a. 90 minutes
*b. 30-60 minutes
c. 10-20 minutes
d. 120 minutes
e. 150 minutes
978. A patient was brought to the hospital with a lacerated wound of the maxillofacial area. Profuse bleeding from the wound could not be stopped for a long time. What disturbance of total blood volume will be observed within the first hour after the blood loss occurred?
a. Oligocythemic hypovolemia
*b. Normocythemic hypovolemia
c. No disturbances in blood volume
d. Hypervolemia
e. Polycythemic hypovolemia
979. A patient was brought to the hospital with a lacerated wound of the maxillofacial area. Profuse bleeding from the wound could not be stopped for a long time. What disturbance of total blood volume will be observed within the first hour after the blood loss occurred?
a. Oligocythemic hypovolemia
b. Hypervolemia
c. Polycythemic hypovolemia
*d. Normocythemic hypovolemia
e. No disturbances in blood volume
980. A patient was brought to the hospital with a lacerated wound of the maxillofacial area. Profuse bleeding from the wound could not be stopped for a long time. What disturbance of total blood volume will be observed within the first hour after the blood loss occurred?
a. Polycythemic hypovolemia
*b. Normocythemic hypovolemia
c. Oligocythemic hypovolemia
d. Hypervolemia
e. No disturbances in blood volume
981. A patient was delivered into a hospital with the provisional diagnosis of botulism. What serological reaction should be used for detection of botulinum toxin in the material being analyzed?
a. Complement fixation reaction
b. Agglutination reaction
c. Immunofluorescence reaction
d. Precipitation reaction
*e. Neutralization reaction
982. A patient was delivered into a hospital with the provisional diagnosis of botulism. What serological reaction should be used for detection of botulinum toxin in the material being analyzed?
a. Immunofluorescence reaction
*b. Neutralization reaction
c. Complement fixation reaction
d. Agglutination reaction
e. Precipitation reaction
983. A patient was delivered into a hospital with the provisional diagnosis of botulism. What serological reaction should be used for detection of botulinum toxin in the material being analyzed?
a. Immunofluorescence reaction
b. Agglutination reaction
c. Complement fixation reaction
*d. Neutralization reaction
e. Precipitation reaction
984. A patient was delivered into the admission room. He has the signs of acute heart failure: pallor, acrocyanosis, frequent and shallow respirations. What medicine of those listed below is indicated in this case?
*a. Corglycon (Convallatoxin)
b. Digitoxin
c. Cordiamin (Nikethamide)
d. Adrenaline hydrochloride
e. Nitroglycerine
985. A patient was delivered into the admission room. He has the signs of acute heart failure: pallor, acrocyanosis, frequent and shallow respirations. What medicine of those listed below is indicated in this case?
a. Cordiamin (Nikethamide)
b. Digitoxin
c. Adrenaline hydrochloride
*d. Corglycon (Convallatoxin)
e. Nitroglycerine
986. A patient was delivered into the admission room. He has the signs of acute heart failure: pallor, acrocyanosis, frequent and shallow respirations. What medicine of those listed below is indicated in this case?
a. Digitoxin
*b. Corglycon (Convallatoxin)
c. Nitroglycerine
d. Cordiamin (Nikethamide)
e. Adrenaline hydrochloride
987. A patient was diagnosed with Klinefelter's syndrome. The patient with this disease will have the karyotype (47, XY). How many sex chromosomes are in this complement?
*a. Three
b. Zero
c. Two
d. One
e. Forty four
988. A patient was diagnosed with Klinefelter's syndrome. The patient with this disease will have the karyotype (47, XY). How many sex chromosomes are in this complement?
a. One
*b. Three
c. Two
d. Zero
e. Forty four
989. A patient was diagnosed with Klinefelter's syndrome. The patient with this disease will have the karyotype (47, XY). How many sex chromosomes are in this complement?
a. Zero
b. One
c. Forty four
*d. Three
e. Two
990. A patient was diagnosed with a damaged intervertebral disk in the lumbar spine. What type of joint is it?
a. Diarthrosis
b. Synostosis
*c. Synchondrosis
d. Symphisis
e. Syndesmosis
991. A patient was diagnosed with a damaged intervertebral disk in the lumbar spine. What type of joint is it?
a. Synostosis
*b. Synchondrosis
c. Symphisis
d. Diarthrosis
e. Syndesmosis
992. A patient was diagnosed with a damaged intervertebral disk in the lumbar spine. What type of joint is it?
a. Synostosis
b. Syndesmosis
c. Symphisis
*d. Synchondrosis
e. Diarthrosis
993. A patient was diagnosed with a genetic disorder leading to lipoprotein lipase deficiency. What finding will be characteristic of biochemical blood analysis in this case?
*a. Hypertriacylglycerolemia
b. Hypotriacylglycerolemia
c. Hyperglycemia
d. Hypochylomicronemia
e. Hypoglycemia
994. A patient was diagnosed with a genetic disorder leading to lipoprotein lipase deficiency. What finding will be characteristic of biochemical blood analysis in this case?
a. Hypochylomicronemia
*b. Hypertriacylglycerolemia
c. Hypoglycemia
d. Hyperglycemia
e. Hypotriacylglycerolemia
995. A patient was diagnosed with a genetic disorder leading to lipoprotein lipase deficiency. What finding will be characteristic of biochemical blood analysis in this case?
a. Hypochylomicronemia
b. Hypoglycemia
c. Hypotriacylglycerolemia
*d. Hypertriacylglycerolemia
e. Hyperglycemia
996. A patient was diagnosed with a malignant tumor of the pineal gland. The tumor penetrates into one of the subarachnoid cisterns in the brain. To remove the tumor, a surgery must be performed in the area of the following cistern:
a. Cisterna ambiens
b. Cisterna chiasmatis
c. Cisterna pericallosa
*d. Cisterna quadrigeminalis
e. Cisterna interpeduncularis
997. A patient was diagnosed with a malignant tumor of the pineal gland. The tumor penetrates into one of the subarachnoid cisterns in the brain. To remove the tumor, a surgery must be performed in the area of the following cistern:
a. Cisterna chiasmatis
b. Cisterna ambiens
c. Cisterna interpeduncularis
d. Cisterna pericallosa
*e. Cisterna quadrigeminalis
998. A patient was diagnosed with a malignant tumor of the pineal gland. The tumor penetrates into one of the subarachnoid cisterns in the brain. To remove the tumor, a surgery must be performed in the area of the following cistern:
a. Cisterna pericallosa
b. Cisterna interpeduncularis
c. Cisterna ambiens
*d. Cisterna quadrigeminalis
e. Cisterna chiasmatis
999. A patient was diagnosed with a monogenic hereditary disease. Name this disease:
*a. Hemophilia
b. Peptic ulcer disease of the stomach
c. Hymenolepiasis
d. Hypertension
e. Poliomyelitis
1000. A patient was diagnosed with a monogenic hereditary disease. Name this disease:
*a. Hemophilia
b. Peptic ulcer disease of the stomach
c. Hypertension
d. Poliomyelitis
e. Hymenolepiasis
1001. A patient was diagnosed with a monogenic hereditary disease. Name this disease:
a. Hymenolepiasis
b. Poliomyelitis
c. Hypertension
*d. Hemophilia
e. Peptic ulcer disease of the stomach
1002. A patient was diagnosed with caries and underwent an oropharyngeal swab. In the sample, microscopy detected unicellular organisms with wide pseudopodia; their cytoplasm is clearly divided into two layers, while the nucleus is barely visible. What protozoon was detected in the swab?
*a. Entamoeba gingivalis
b. Lamblia intestinalis
c. Trichomonas hominis
d. Entamoeba coli
e. Entamoeba histolytica
1003. A patient was diagnosed with caries and underwent an oropharyngeal swab. In the sample, microscopy detected unicellular organisms with wide pseudopodia; their cytoplasm is clearly divided into two layers, while the nucleus is barely visible. What protozoon was detected in the swab?
*a. Entamoeba gingivalis
b. Trichomonas hominis
c. Lamblia intestinalis
d. Entamoeba coli
e. Entamoeba histolytica
1004. A patient was diagnosed with caries and underwent an oropharyngeal swab. In the sample, microscopy detected unicellular organisms with wide pseudopodia; their cytoplasm is clearly divided into two layers, while the nucleus is barely visible. What protozoon was detected in the swab?
a. Lamblia intestinalis
b. Entamoeba coli
*c. Entamoeba gingivalis
d. Entamoeba histolytica
e. Trichomonas hominis
1005. A patient was diagnosed with caries complicated by chronic pulpitis. During an examination, the dentist found a proliferation of soft bright-pink tissue in the form of a polyp over the preserved part of the patient's dental crown. What disease can be characterized by these signs?
*a. Granulating pulpitis
b. Fibrous pulpitis
c. Gangrenous pulpitis
d. Serous pulpitis
e. Diffuse purulent pulpitis
1006. A patient was diagnosed with caries complicated by chronic pulpitis. During an examination, the dentist found a proliferation of soft bright-pink tissue in the form of a polyp over the preserved part of the patient's dental crown. What disease can be characterized by these signs?
a. Diffuse purulent pulpitis
*b. Granulating pulpitis
c. Serous pulpitis
d. Fibrous pulpitis
e. Gangrenous pulpitis
1007. A patient was diagnosed with caries complicated by chronic pulpitis. During an examination, the dentist found a proliferation of soft bright-pink tissue in the form of a polyp over the preserved part of the patient's dental crown. What disease can be characterized by these signs?
a. Fibrous pulpitis
b. Serous pulpitis
c. Diffuse purulent pulpitis
*d. Granulating pulpitis
e. Gangrenous pulpitis
1008. A patient was diagnosed with ishemic heart disease and prescribed a calcium channel blocker agent. What drug is it?
a. Nitroglycerin
b. Carvedilol
c. Thiotriazoline
*d. Amlodipine
e. Eldepryl (Selegiline)
1009. A patient was diagnosed with ishemic heart disease and prescribed a calcium channel blocker agent. What drug is it?
a. Nitroglycerin
b. Eldepryl (Selegiline)
c. Carvedilol
d. Thiotriazoline
*e. Amlodipine
1010. A patient was diagnosed with ishemic heart disease and prescribed a calcium channel blocker agent. What drug is it?
a. Thiotriazoline
b. Eldepryl (Selegiline)
c. Nitroglycerin
d. Carvedilol
*e. Amlodipine
1011. A patient was diagnosed with peptic ulcer disease of the stomach and prescribed an antibacterial treatment. This treatment will be aimed against the following causative agent:
a. Cl. trachomatis
*b. H. pylori
c. Cl. perfringens
d. St. aureus
e. E) coli
1012. A patient was diagnosed with peptic ulcer disease of the stomach and prescribed an antibacterial treatment. This treatment will be aimed against the following causative agent:
a. Cl. trachomatis
*b. H. pylori
c. St. aureus
d. E) coli
e. Cl. perfringens
1013. A patient was diagnosed with peptic ulcer disease of the stomach and prescribed an antibacterial treatment. This treatment will be aimed against the following causative agent:
a. Cl. trachomatis
b. Cl. perfringens
c. E) coli
d. St. aureus
*e. H. pylori
1014. A patient was diagnosed with thrombosis of the inferior mesenteric artery. What part of the intestine is affected in this case?
*a. Sigmoid colon
b. Ileum
c. Jejunum
d. Vermiform appendix
e. Duodenum
1015. A patient was diagnosed with thrombosis of the inferior mesenteric artery. What part of the intestine is affected in this case?
a. Jejunum
b. Vermiform appendix
*c. Sigmoid colon
d. Ileum
e. Duodenum
1016. A patient was diagnosed with thrombosis of the inferior mesenteric artery. What part of the intestine is affected in this case?
a. Vermiform appendix
b. Jejunum
c. Duodenum
d. Ileum
*e. Sigmoid colon
1017. A patient was diagnosed with xeroderma pigmentosum that manifested in skin keratinization, eye damage, and dilation of capillaries. In this disease, prolonged exposure to UV radiation results in skin tumors. What exogenous factor will significantly aggravate the condition of a patient with this diagnosis?
*a. Light
b. Ultrasound
c. High humidity
d. High temperature
e. Overexposure to cold
1018. A patient was diagnosed with xeroderma pigmentosum that manifested in skin keratinization, eye damage, and dilation of capillaries. In this disease, prolonged exposure to UV radiation results in skin tumors. What exogenous factor will significantly aggravate the condition of a patient with this diagnosis?
a. High humidity
b. High temperature
*c. Light
d. Overexposure to cold
e. Ultrasound
1019. A patient was diagnosed with xeroderma pigmentosum that manifested in skin keratinization, eye damage, and dilation of capillaries. In this disease, prolonged exposure to UV radiation results in skin tumors. What exogenous factor will significantly aggravate the condition of a patient with this diagnosis?
a. High humidity
b. Overexposure to cold
c. High temperature
*d. Light
e. Ultrasound
1020. A patient was hospitalized on the fifth day after the onset of the disease that manifests as jaundice, muscle pain, chills, and nosebleeds. During laboratory diagnostics, dark-field microscopy of a drop of the patient's blood was performed. Name the causative agents of this disease.
a. Bartonella bacilliformis
b. Calymmatobacterium granulomatis
c. Rickettsia mooseri
*d. Leptospira interrogans
e. Borrelia duttonii
1021. A patient was hospitalized on the fifth day after the onset of the disease that manifests as jaundice, muscle pain, chills, and nosebleeds. During laboratory diagnostics, dark-field microscopy of a drop of the patient's blood was performed. Name the causative agents of this disease.
a. Bartonella bacilliformis
b. Calymmatobacterium granulomatis
c. Rickettsia mooseri
d. Borrelia duttonii
*e. Leptospira interrogans
1022. A patient was hospitalized on the fifth day after the onset of the disease that manifests as jaundice, muscle pain, chills, and nosebleeds. During laboratory diagnostics, dark-field microscopy of a drop of the patient's blood was performed. Name the causative agents of this disease.
a. Rickettsia mooseri
*b. Leptospira interrogans
c. Calymmatobacterium granulomatis
d. Bartonella bacilliformis
e. Borrelia duttonii
1023. A patient was hospitalized with the signs of acute blood loss. What is the leading component in the pathogenesis of posthemorrhagic shock?
*a. Hypovolemia
b. Hypoxia
c. Decreased cardiac output
d. Anemia
e. Decreased vascular tone
1024. A patient was hospitalized with the signs of acute blood loss. What is the leading component in the pathogenesis of posthemorrhagic shock?
a. Decreased vascular tone
b. Decreased cardiac output
c. Hypoxia
d. Anemia
*e. Hypovolemia
1025. A patient was hospitalized with the signs of acute blood loss. What is the leading component in the pathogenesis of posthemorrhagic shock?
a. Hypoxia
b. Decreased vascular tone
*c. Hypovolemia
d. Decreased cardiac output
e. Anemia
1026. A patient was prescribed oral irrigation with hydrogen peroxide solution. It belongs to the following group of antiseptics:
a. Alcohols
b. Detergents
c. Dyes
d. Nitrofurans
*e. Oxidants
1027. A patient was prescribed oral irrigation with hydrogen peroxide solution. It belongs to the following group of antiseptics:
a. Dyes
b. Nitrofurans
*c. Oxidants
d. Alcohols
e. Detergents
1028. A patient was prescribed oral irrigation with hydrogen peroxide solution. It belongs to the following group of antiseptics:
a. Nitrofurans
b. Detergents
c. Alcohols
*d. Oxidants
e. Dyes
1029. A patient who died of chronic kidney disease has dull pericardial layers with thin fiber-like gray deposits. What pathologic process is observed in the pericardium?
*a. Fibrinous inflammation
b. Proliferative inflammation
c. Suppurative inflammation
d. Catarrhal inflammation
e. Serous inflammation
1030. A patient who died of chronic kidney disease has dull pericardial layers with thin fiber-like gray deposits. What pathologic process is observed in the pericardium?
*a. Fibrinous inflammation
b. Serous inflammation
c. Proliferative inflammation
d. Catarrhal inflammation
e. Suppurative inflammation
1031. A patient who died of chronic kidney disease has dull pericardial layers with thin fiber-like gray deposits. What pathologic process is observed in the pericardium?
a. Suppurative inflammation
b. Serous inflammation
c. Catarrhal inflammation
d. Proliferative inflammation
*e. Fibrinous inflammation
1032. A patient who had his lower second molar extracted presents with bleeding from the tooth socket. What vessel is the source of the bleeding in this case?
*a. Maxillary artery
b. Ascending pharyngeal artery
c. Facial artery
d. Ophthalmic artery
e. Lingual artery
1033. A patient who had his lower second molar extracted presents with bleeding from the tooth socket. What vessel is the source of the bleeding in this case?
a. Ascending pharyngeal artery
b. Lingual artery
c. Ophthalmic artery
d. Facial artery
*e. Maxillary artery
1034. A patient who had his lower second molar extracted presents with bleeding from the tooth socket. What vessel is the source of the bleeding in this case?
a. Lingual artery
b. Facial artery
c. Ascending pharyngeal artery
d. Ophthalmic artery
*e. Maxillary artery
1035. A patient with Cushing syndrome presents with persistent hyperglycemia and glucosuria. This patient is likely to have increased production and secretion of the following hormone:
a. Aldosterone
b. Adrenaline
c. Thyroxine
*d. Cortisol
e. Glucagon
1036. A patient with Cushing syndrome presents with persistent hyperglycemia and glucosuria. This patient is likely to have increased production and secretion of the following hormone:
a. Thyroxine
*b. Cortisol
c. Adrenaline
d. Aldosterone
e. Glucagon
1037. A patient with Cushing syndrome presents with persistent hyperglycemia and glucosuria. This patient is likely to have increased production and secretion of the following hormone:
a. Thyroxine
b. Glucagon
c. Aldosterone
d. Adrenaline
*e. Cortisol
1038. A patient with a basilar skull fracture presents with damage to the hook-like process of the medial pterygoid plate of the sphenoid bone. What muscle of the soft palate will become dysfunctional in this case?
*a. Tensor veli palatini muscle
b. Musculus uvulae
c. Palatoglossus muscle
d. Palatopharyngeus muscle
e. Levator veli palatini muscle
1039. A patient with a basilar skull fracture presents with damage to the hook-like process of the medial pterygoid plate of the sphenoid bone. What muscle of the soft palate will become dysfunctional in this case?
a. Levator veli palatini muscle
b. Musculus uvulae
c. Palatoglossus muscle
d. Palatopharyngeus muscle
*e. Tensor veli palatini muscle
1040. A patient with a basilar skull fracture presents with damage to the hook-like process of the medial pterygoid plate of the sphenoid bone. What muscle of the soft palate will become dysfunctional in this case?
a. Musculus uvulae
b. Palatopharyngeus muscle
*c. Tensor veli palatini muscle
d. Levator veli palatini muscle
e. Palatoglossus muscle
1041. A patient with a head trauma was brought to the hospital. He was diagnosed with a fracture of the sphenoid bone at the base of the sphenoidal process. What canal is likely to be damaged in this case?
a. Facial canal
b. Tympanic canal
c. Musculotubal canal
*d. Pterygoid canal
e. Carotid canal
1042. A patient with a head trauma was brought to the hospital. He was diagnosed with a fracture of the sphenoid bone at the base of the sphenoidal process. What canal is likely to be damaged in this case?
a. Musculotubal canal
*b. Pterygoid canal
c. Facial canal
d. Carotid canal
e. Tympanic canal
1043. A patient with a head trauma was brought to the hospital. He was diagnosed with a fracture of the sphenoid bone at the base of the sphenoidal process. What canal is likely to be damaged in this case?
a. Tympanic canal
b. Musculotubal canal
c. Facial canal
d. Carotid canal
*e. Pterygoid canal
1044. A patient with a hemorrhage into the anterior hypothalamus developed polyuria. What hormone is in this case insufficient, leading to the decreased water reabsorption in the renal tubules?
*a. Vasopressin
b. Aldosterone
c. Calcitonin
d. Adrenaline
e. Oxytocin
1045. A patient with a hemorrhage into the anterior hypothalamus developed polyuria. What hormone is in this case insufficient, leading to the decreased water reabsorption in the renal tubules?
a. Aldosterone
b. Adrenaline
c. Calcitonin
*d. Vasopressin
e. Oxytocin
1046. A patient with a hemorrhage into the anterior hypothalamus developed polyuria. What hormone is in this case insufficient, leading to the decreased water reabsorption in the renal tubules?
a. Aldosterone
b. Adrenaline
c. Oxytocin
d. Calcitonin
*e. Vasopressin
1047. A patient with a many-year-long history of mandibular osteomyelitis developed edema, massive proteinuria, and hyperlipidemia. What condition is the most likely in this patient?
a. Pyelonephritis
b. Urolithiasis
c. Chronic kidney disease
*d. Nephrotic syndrome
e. Nephritis
1048. A patient with a many-year-long history of mandibular osteomyelitis developed edema, massive proteinuria, and hyperlipidemia. What condition is the most likely in this patient?
a. Urolithiasis
*b. Nephrotic syndrome
c. Chronic kidney disease
d. Nephritis
e. Pyelonephritis
1049. A patient with a many-year-long history of mandibular osteomyelitis developed edema, massive proteinuria, and hyperlipidemia. What condition is the most likely in this patient?
a. Urolithiasis
*b. Nephrotic syndrome
c. Pyelonephritis
d. Nephritis
e. Chronic kidney disease
1050. A patient with a severe toothache that lasted for several days made no appointment with a doctor and engaged in self-treatment instead. As a result, his tooth needs to be extracted. What analgesic increases the probability of a hemorrhage developing after the tooth is extracted?
*a. Acetylsalicylic acid
b. Dimedrol (Diphenhydramine)
c. Paracetamol
d. Analgin (Metamizole)
e. Codeine phosphate
1051. A patient with a severe toothache that lasted for several days made no appointment with a doctor and engaged in self-treatment instead. As a result, his tooth needs to be extracted. What analgesic increases the probability of a hemorrhage developing after the tooth is extracted?
a. Dimedrol (Diphenhydramine)
*b. Acetylsalicylic acid
c. Codeine phosphate
d. Paracetamol
e. Analgin (Metamizole)
1052. A patient with a severe toothache that lasted for several days made no appointment with a doctor and engaged in self-treatment instead. As a result, his tooth needs to be extracted. What analgesic increases the probability of a hemorrhage developing after the tooth is extracted?
a. Dimedrol (Diphenhydramine)
b. Codeine phosphate
c. Paracetamol
d. Analgin (Metamizole)
*e. Acetylsalicylic acid
1053. A patient with acne is prescribed doxycycline hydrochloride. What should the patient be warned against, regarding administration of this drug?
a. Course of treatment should not exceed 1 day
b. Take before eating
c. Take with large amount of liquid, preferably milk
d. Do not take with vitamin preparations
*e. Avoid prolonged exposure to the sun
1054. A patient with acne is prescribed doxycycline hydrochloride. What should the patient be warned against, regarding administration of this drug?
a. Take before eating
b. Course of treatment should not exceed 1 day
c. Do not take with vitamin preparations
d. Take with large amount of liquid, preferably milk
*e. Avoid prolonged exposure to the sun
1055. A patient with acne is prescribed doxycycline hydrochloride. What should the patient be warned against, regarding administration of this drug?
a. Take before eating
b. Do not take with vitamin preparations
c. Course of treatment should not exceed 1 day
d. Take with large amount of liquid, preferably milk
*e. Avoid prolonged exposure to the sun
1056. A patient with acute appendicitis presents with increasing leukocyte blood count. What type of leukocytosis can be observed in the patients diagnosed with this condition?
a. Basophilic
b. Eosinophilic
*c. Neutrophilic
d. Lymphocytosis
e. Monocytosis
1057. A patient with acute appendicitis presents with increasing leukocyte blood count. What type of leukocytosis can be observed in the patients diagnosed with this condition?
a. Lymphocytosis
b. Eosinophilic
c. Monocytosis
d. Basophilic
*e. Neutrophilic
1058. A patient with acute appendicitis presents with increasing leukocyte blood count. What type of leukocytosis can be observed in the patients diagnosed with this condition?
a. Monocytosis
b. Eosinophilic
*c. Neutrophilic
d. Basophilic
e. Lymphocytosis
1059. A patient with acute pancreatitis presents with significantly increased urine diastase content. What proteolysis inhibitor must be included into complex therapy of this patient?
a. Digestal
b. Mezym forte
c. Pancreatine
d. Festal
*e. Contrykal (Aprotinin)
1060. A patient with acute pancreatitis presents with significantly increased urine diastase content. What proteolysis inhibitor must be included into complex therapy of this patient?
a. Digestal
b. Pancreatine
*c. Contrykal (Aprotinin)
d. Mezym forte
e. Festal
1061. A patient with acute pancreatitis presents with significantly increased urine diastase content. What proteolysis inhibitor must be included into complex therapy of this patient?
a. Mezym forte
b. Digestal
*c. Contrykal (Aprotinin)
d. Festal
e. Pancreatine
1062. A patient with alcoholism has hepatic cirrhosis. Within the last half a year he developed varicose abdominal veins, splenomegaly, and ascites (portal hypertension syndrome). What complication is the most likely cause of the patient's death?
*a. Hemorrhage from the gastrointestinal varices
b. Accelerated hemolysis
c. Hypoproteinemia
d. Hepatic encephalopathy
e. Hepatolienal syndrome
1063. A patient with alcoholism has hepatic cirrhosis. Within the last half a year he developed varicose abdominal veins, splenomegaly, and ascites (portal hypertension syndrome). What complication is the most likely cause of the patient's death?
a. Hepatolienal syndrome
b. Hypoproteinemia
*c. Hemorrhage from the gastrointestinal varices
d. Hepatic encephalopathy
e. Accelerated hemolysis
1064. A patient with alcoholism has hepatic cirrhosis. Within the last half a year he developed varicose abdominal veins, splenomegaly, and ascites (portal hypertension syndrome). What complication is the most likely cause of the patient's death?
a. Hypoproteinemia
b. Hepatolienal syndrome
*c. Hemorrhage from the gastrointestinal varices
d. Accelerated hemolysis
e. Hepatic encephalopathy
1065. A patient with an angina pectoris attack was brought into the intensive care unit. What drug must be administered in this case to stop the angina pectoris attack?
*a. Nitroglycerin
b. Heparin
c. Calcium chloride
d. Vicasolum (Menadione)
e. Furosemide
1066. A patient with an angina pectoris attack was brought into the intensive care unit. What drug must be administered in this case to stop the angina pectoris attack?
*a. Nitroglycerin
b. Vicasolum (Menadione)
c. Calcium chloride
d. Furosemide
e. Heparin
1067. A patient with an angina pectoris attack was brought into the intensive care unit. What drug must be administered in this case to stop the angina pectoris attack?
a. Vicasolum (Menadione)
b. Calcium chloride
c. Heparin
*d. Nitroglycerin
e. Furosemide
1068. A patient with an incised wound in the area of the middle part of the sternocleidomastoid muscle presents with impaired skin sensitivity in the front part of the neck. What nerve is damaged in this case?
a. N. occipitalis minor
b. N. auricularis magnus
c. N. phrenicus
d. Nn. supraclaviculares
*e. N. transversus colli
1069. A patient with an incised wound in the area of the middle part of the sternocleidomastoid muscle presents with impaired skin sensitivity in the front part of the neck. What nerve is damaged in this case?
a. N. phrenicus
*b. N. transversus colli
c. Nn. supraclaviculares
d. N. occipitalis minor
e. N. auricularis magnus
1070. A patient with bronchial asthma developed acute respiratory insufficiency. What type of respiratory insufficiency develops in such cases?
*a. Obstructive disturbance of alveolar ventilation
b. Perfusion insufficiency
c. Dysregulatory disturbance of alveolar ventilation
d. Diffusion insufficiency
e. Restrictive disturbance of alveolar ventilation
1071. A patient with bronchial asthma developed acute respiratory insufficiency. What type of respiratory insufficiency develops in such cases?
*a. Obstructive disturbance of alveolar ventilation
b. Restrictive disturbance of alveolar ventilation
c. Dysregulatory disturbance of alveolar ventilation
d. Perfusion insufficiency
e. Diffusion insufficiency
1072. A patient with bronchial asthma developed acute respiratory insufficiency. What type of respiratory insufficiency develops in such cases?
a. Restrictive disturbance of alveolar ventilation
b. Perfusion insufficiency
*c. Obstructive disturbance of alveolar ventilation
d. Diffusion insufficiency
e. Dysregulatory disturbance of alveolar ventilation
1073. A patient with bronchopneumonia was prescribed acetylcysteine. What are the indications for this drug?
a. Asphyxia of newborn
b. Bronchial asthma
*c. Productive bronchitis
d. Convulsions
e. Heart failure
1074. A patient with bronchopneumonia was prescribed acetylcysteine. What are the indications for this drug?
a. Bronchial asthma
*b. Productive bronchitis
c. Asphyxia of newborn
d. Heart failure
e. Convulsions
1075. A patient with bronchopneumonia was prescribed acetylcysteine. What are the indications for this drug?
a. Bronchial asthma
b. Convulsions
c. Heart failure
d. Asphyxia of newborn
*e. Productive bronchitis
1076. A patient with cholelithiasis produces colorless fatty feces because of obturation of the bile ducts. Steatorrhea is caused by the absence of a certain bile component. Name this component:
*a. Bile acids
b. Alkaline phosphatase
c. Cholesterol
d. Fatty acids
e. Bile pigments
1077. A patient with cholelithiasis produces colorless fatty feces because of obturation of the bile ducts. Steatorrhea is caused by the absence of a certain bile component. Name this component:
a. Alkaline phosphatase
*b. Bile acids
c. Bile pigments
d. Fatty acids
e. Cholesterol
1078. A patient with cholelithiasis produces colorless fatty feces because of obturation of the bile ducts. Steatorrhea is caused by the absence of a certain bile component. Name this component:
a. Bile pigments
b. Fatty acids
c. Cholesterol
d. Alkaline phosphatase
*e. Bile acids
1079. A patient with chronic caries of tooth 36 did not visit a dentist for a long time. The patient developed a sharp pain in the lower jaw and a cheek swelling. His body temperature increased up to 38^oC) What changes in the blood test findings should be expected in this case?
a. Anemia
b. Monocytosis
*c. Neutrophilia
d. Eosinophilia
e. Leukopenia
1080. A patient with chronic caries of tooth 36 did not visit a dentist for a long time. The patient developed a sharp pain in the lower jaw and a cheek swelling. His body temperature increased up to 38^oC) What changes in the blood test findings should be expected in this case?
a. Leukopenia
*b. Neutrophilia
c. Monocytosis
d. Eosinophilia
e. Anemia
1081. A patient with chronic caries of tooth 36 did not visit a dentist for a long time. The patient developed a sharp pain in the lower jaw and a cheek swelling. His body temperature increased up to 38^oC) What changes in the blood test findings should be expected in this case?
a. Monocytosis
b. Anemia
c. Leukopenia
*d. Neutrophilia
e. Eosinophilia
1082. A patient with chronic hepatitis undergoes blood test for serum protein fractions. Total protein levels are low, which indicates that in the hepatic cells the following organelles are functionally disturbed:
*a. Granular endoplasmic reticulum
b. Golgi apparatus
c. Lysosomes
d. Cytoskeleton
e. Mitochondria
1083. A patient with chronic hepatitis undergoes blood test for serum protein fractions. Total protein levels are low, which indicates that in the hepatic cells the following organelles are functionally disturbed:
a. Lysosomes
b. Mitochondria
*c. Granular endoplasmic reticulum
d. Cytoskeleton
e. Golgi apparatus
1084. A patient with chronic hepatitis undergoes blood test for serum protein fractions. Total protein levels are low, which indicates that in the hepatic cells the following organelles are functionally disturbed:
a. Mitochondria
b. Lysosomes
c. Golgi apparatus
d. Cytoskeleton
*e. Granular endoplasmic reticulum
1085. A patient with chronic hyperacidic gastritis developed joint pain and was prescribed celecoxib. This drug has no effect on gastric mucosa because of its selective effect on a certain enzyme. What enzyme is it?
a. Cyclooxygenase 1
b. Kallikrein
c. Phospholipase C
d. Phospholipase A2
*e. Cyclooxygenase 2
1086. A patient with chronic hyperacidic gastritis developed joint pain and was prescribed celecoxib. This drug has no effect on gastric mucosa because of its selective effect on a certain enzyme. What enzyme is it?
a. Phospholipase C
*b. Cyclooxygenase 2
c. Phospholipase A2
d. Cyclooxygenase 1
e. Kallikrein
1087. A patient with chronic hyperacidic gastritis developed joint pain and was prescribed celecoxib. This drug has no effect on gastric mucosa because of its selective effect on a certain enzyme. What enzyme is it?
a. Phospholipase C
b. Kallikrein
*c. Cyclooxygenase 2
d. Cyclooxygenase 1
e. Phospholipase A2
1088. A patient with chronic hypoacid gastritis has hypochromic anemia. Blood smear test revealed codocytes (target cells), microanisocytosis, and poikilocytosis. What type of anemia is observed in the patient?
a. Thalassemia
b. Pernicious anemia
*c. Iron deficiency anemia
d. Sickle cell anemia
e. Acute posthemorrhagic anemia
1089. A patient with chronic hypoacid gastritis has hypochromic anemia. Blood smear test revealed codocytes (target cells), microanisocytosis, and poikilocytosis. What type of anemia is observed in the patient?
a. Thalassemia
b. Pernicious anemia
c. Acute posthemorrhagic anemia
d. Sickle cell anemia
*e. Iron deficiency anemia
1090. A patient with chronic hypoacid gastritis has hypochromic anemia. Blood smear test revealed codocytes (target cells), microanisocytosis, and poikilocytosis. What type of anemia is observed in the patient?
a. Thalassemia
b. Sickle cell anemia
c. Acute posthemorrhagic anemia
*d. Iron deficiency anemia
e. Pernicious anemia
1091. A patient with damaged muscles of the lower limbs has been delivered to a first-aid center. What cells enable reparative regeneration of muscle fibers and restoration of muscle function?
*a. Myosatellitocytes
b. Fibroblasts
c. Endotheliocytes
d. Adipocytes
e. Plasmocytes
1092. A patient with damaged muscles of the lower limbs has been delivered to a first-aid center. What cells enable reparative regeneration of muscle fibers and restoration of muscle function?
a. Endotheliocytes
b. Adipocytes
c. Plasmocytes
d. Fibroblasts
*e. Myosatellitocytes
1093. A patient with damaged muscles of the lower limbs has been delivered to a first-aid center. What cells enable reparative regeneration of muscle fibers and restoration of muscle function?
a. Plasmocytes
*b. Myosatellitocytes
c. Adipocytes
d. Fibroblasts
e. Endotheliocytes
1094. A patient with diabetes mellitus developed a pain in the right leg. The tissues of the big toe became black and edematous, desquamation of the epidermis is observed and a foul-smelling discharge is produced. Specify the pathological process:
a. Dry gangrene
*b. Wet gangrene
c. Infarction
d. Coagulative necrosis
e. Sequestrum
1095. A patient with diabetes mellitus developed a pain in the right leg. The tissues of the big toe became black and edematous, desquamation of the epidermis is observed and a foul-smelling discharge is produced. Specify the pathological process:
a. Dry gangrene
b. Sequestrum
c. Coagulative necrosis
d. Infarction
*e. Wet gangrene
1096. A patient with diabetes mellitus developed a pain in the right leg. The tissues of the big toe became black and edematous, desquamation of the epidermis is observed and a foul-smelling discharge is produced. Specify the pathological process:
a. Infarction
b. Sequestrum
c. Coagulative necrosis
d. Dry gangrene
*e. Wet gangrene
1097. A patient with diabetes mellitus developed acidosis because of ketone bodies accumulation in the blood. What changes will be observed in the respiratory system in this case?
*a. Pulmonary ventilation increases
b. Bronchial spasms occur periodically
c. Breath holding occurs
d. Pulmonary ventilation decreases
e. Cheyne-Stokes respiration is observed
1098. A patient with diabetes mellitus developed acidosis because of ketone bodies accumulation in the blood. What changes will be observed in the respiratory system in this case?
a. Cheyne-Stokes respiration is observed
b. Bronchial spasms occur periodically
*c. Pulmonary ventilation increases
d. Breath holding occurs
e. Pulmonary ventilation decreases
1099. A patient with diabetes mellitus developed acidosis because of ketone bodies accumulation in the blood. What changes will be observed in the respiratory system in this case?
a. Pulmonary ventilation decreases
b. Breath holding occurs
c. Cheyne-Stokes respiration is observed
d. Bronchial spasms occur periodically
*e. Pulmonary ventilation increases
1100. A patient with dislocated jaw was given a short-acting muscle relaxant by a doctor. Name this drug:
a. Procaine
b. Papaverine hydrochloride
*c. Dithylinum (Suxamethonium chloride)
d. Pyridostigmine hydrobromide
e. Cytitonum (Cytisine)
1101. A patient with dislocated jaw was given a short-acting muscle relaxant by a doctor. Name this drug:
a. Procaine
b. Pyridostigmine hydrobromide
c. Cytitonum (Cytisine)
d. Papaverine hydrochloride
*e. Dithylinum (Suxamethonium chloride)
1102. A patient with dislocated jaw was given a short-acting muscle relaxant by a doctor. Name this drug:
a. Pyridostigmine hydrobromide
b. Procaine
c. Cytitonum (Cytisine)
d. Papaverine hydrochloride
*e. Dithylinum (Suxamethonium chloride)
1103. A patient with electrical injury to the neck area developed pathologic fixed sideways flexion of the head towards the injured area, while the face is fixed away from the injury. What neck muscle sustained scarring?
a. Anterior scalene muscle
b. Trapezius muscle
c. Omohyoid muscle
d. Digastric muscle
*e. Sternocleidomastoid muscle
1104. A patient with electrical injury to the neck area developed pathologic fixed sideways flexion of the head towards the injured area, while the face is fixed away from the injury. What neck muscle sustained scarring?
a. Trapezius muscle
*b. Sternocleidomastoid muscle
c. Anterior scalene muscle
d. Omohyoid muscle
e. Digastric muscle
1105. A patient with electrical injury to the neck area developed pathologic fixed sideways flexion of the head towards the injured area, while the face is fixed away from the injury. What neck muscle sustained scarring?
a. Trapezius muscle
b. Omohyoid muscle
c. Digastric muscle
*d. Sternocleidomastoid muscle
e. Anterior scalene muscle
1106. A patient with essential hypertension has increased blood vasopressin levels. This hormone has an effect on the functioning of the following organ:
a. Heart
*b. Kidneys
c. Adrenal glands
d. Lungs
e. Liver
1107. A patient with essential hypertension has increased blood vasopressin levels. This hormone has an effect on the functioning of the following organ:
a. Heart
b. Liver
c. Adrenal glands
d. Lungs
*e. Kidneys
1108. A patient with essential hypertension has increased blood vasopressin levels. This hormone has an effect on the functioning of the following organ:
a. Liver
b. Adrenal glands
c. Lungs
d. Heart
*e. Kidneys
1109. A patient with essential hypertension presents with circadian fluctuations in total peripheral vascular resistance to blood flow. What vessels will be the most affected in this case?
a. Arteriolovenular anastomoses
b. Capillaries
c. Veins
d. Aorta
*e. Arterioles
1110. A patient with essential hypertension presents with circadian fluctuations in total peripheral vascular resistance to blood flow. What vessels will be the most affected in this case?
a. Capillaries
*b. Arterioles
c. Veins
d. Arteriolovenular anastomoses
e. Aorta
1111. A patient with essential hypertension presents with circadian fluctuations in total peripheral vascular resistance to blood flow. What vessels will be the most affected in this case?
a. Capillaries
b. Arteriolovenular anastomoses
*c. Arterioles
d. Aorta
e. Veins
1112. A patient with essential hypertension presents with significant increase in  left ventricular myocardial mass. It is likely to be caused by:
*a. Increased volume of cardiomyocytes
b. Increased number of cardiomyocytes
c. Myocardial fluid retention
d. Fatty infiltration of the myocardium
e. Proliferation of connective tissue
1113. A patient with essential hypertension presents with significant increase in  left ventricular myocardial mass. It is likely to be caused by:
a. Increased number of cardiomyocytes
*b. Increased volume of cardiomyocytes
c. Proliferation of connective tissue
d. Myocardial fluid retention
e. Fatty infiltration of the myocardium
1114. A patient with essential hypertension was prescribed captopril. In this case, formation of a certain substance will decrease. Name this substance.
a. Bradykinin
*b. Angiotensin II
c. Renin
d. Serotonin
e. Histamine
1115. A patient with essential hypertension was prescribed captopril. In this case, formation of a certain substance will decrease. Name this substance.
a. Histamine
b. Bradykinin
c. Serotonin
*d. Angiotensin II
e. Renin
1116. A patient with essential hypertension was prescribed captopril. In this case, formation of a certain substance will decrease. Name this substance.
a. Histamine
b. Renin
*c. Angiotensin II
d. Bradykinin
e. Serotonin
1117. A patient with glossitis presents with disappearance of lingual papillae, reddening and burning pain in the tongue. Blood test: erythrocytes - 2.2  10^12/l, hemoglobin - 103 g/l, color index - 1.4. What type of anemia is it?
a. alpha-thalassemia
b. Iron refractory
*c. B_12 folate-deficiency
d. beta-thalassemia
e. Iron deficiency
1118. A patient with glossitis presents with disappearance of lingual papillae, reddening and burning pain in the tongue. Blood test: erythrocytes - 2.2  10^12/l, hemoglobin - 103 g/l, color index - 1.4. What type of anemia is it?
a. alpha-thalassemia
b. beta-thalassemia
c. Iron refractory
d. Iron deficiency
*e. B_12 folate-deficiency
1119. A patient with glossitis presents with disappearance of lingual papillae, reddening and burning pain in the tongue. Blood test: erythrocytes - 2.2  10^12/l, hemoglobin - 103 g/l, color index - 1.4. What type of anemia is it?
a. beta-thalassemia
b. alpha-thalassemia
c. Iron deficiency
*d. B_12 folate-deficiency
e. Iron refractory
1120. A patient with heatstroke was delivered to the admission room. What compensatory reactions develop in the patient's body in such case?
a. Coronary vasospasm
b. Increased heart rate
*c. Peripherial vasodilatation
d. Persistent hyperglycemia
e. Peripheral vasoconstriction
1121. A patient with heatstroke was delivered to the admission room. What compensatory reactions develop in the patient's body in such case?
a. Increased heart rate
b. Coronary vasospasm
*c. Peripherial vasodilatation
d. Peripheral vasoconstriction
e. Persistent hyperglycemia
1122. A patient with heatstroke was delivered to the admission room. What compensatory reactions develop in the patient's body in such case?
a. Increased heart rate
b. Peripheral vasoconstriction
*c. Peripherial vasodilatation
d. Persistent hyperglycemia
e. Coronary vasospasm
1123. A patient with high blood coagulability was for a long time treated with salicylates. What metabolic process risks being disturbed as a result?
*a. Prostaglandin synthesis
b. Oxidative phosphorylation
c. Coupling between tissue respiration and oxidative phosphorylation
d. Microsomal oxidation
e. Tissue respiration
1124. A patient with high blood coagulability was for a long time treated with salicylates. What metabolic process risks being disturbed as a result?
a. Coupling between tissue respiration and oxidative phosphorylation
b. Oxidative phosphorylation
*c. Prostaglandin synthesis
d. Microsomal oxidation
e. Tissue respiration
1125. A patient with high blood coagulability was for a long time treated with salicylates. What metabolic process risks being disturbed as a result?
a. Oxidative phosphorylation
b. Tissue respiration
*c. Prostaglandin synthesis
d. Microsomal oxidation
e. Coupling between tissue respiration and oxidative phosphorylation
1126. A patient with hypersensitivity to sulfonamides needs conduction anesthesia for a tooth extraction. What drug should be used in this case?
*a. Lidocaine
b. Anaesthesin (Benzocaine)
c. Cocaine
d. Dicain (Tetracaine)
e. Novocaine (Procaine)
1127. A patient with hypersensitivity to sulfonamides needs conduction anesthesia for a tooth extraction. What drug should be used in this case?
a. Dicain (Tetracaine)
*b. Lidocaine
c. Cocaine
d. Novocaine (Procaine)
e. Anaesthesin (Benzocaine)
1128. A patient with hypersensitivity to sulfonamides needs conduction anesthesia for a tooth extraction. What drug should be used in this case?
a. Novocaine (Procaine)
b. Anaesthesin (Benzocaine)
c. Dicain (Tetracaine)
d. Cocaine
*e. Lidocaine
1129. A patient with hypochromic anemia was prescribed an iron-containing drug for intravenous administration only. Name this drug:
*a. Fercoven
b. Etacrynic acid
c. Mannitol
d. Dichlothiazide (Hydrochlorothiazide)
e. Furosemide
1130. A patient with hypochromic anemia was prescribed an iron-containing drug for intravenous administration only. Name this drug:
*a. Fercoven
b. Furosemide
c. Dichlothiazide (Hydrochlorothiazide)
d. Etacrynic acid
e. Mannitol
1131. A patient with hypochromic anemia was prescribed an iron-containing drug for intravenous administration only. Name this drug:
a. Mannitol
b. Furosemide
c. Dichlothiazide (Hydrochlorothiazide)
d. Etacrynic acid
*e. Fercoven
1132. A patient with infiltrative pulmonary tuberculosis, who was undergoing treatment with isoniazid, developed signs of B6 hypovitaminosis. What is the cause of this condition?
*a. Isoniazid is a vitamin B6 antagonist
b. A strong connection forms between vitamin and blood plasma proteins
c. Vitamin elimination speeds up
d. Vitamin biotransformation speeds up
e. Vitamin absorption slows down
1133. A patient with infiltrative pulmonary tuberculosis, who was undergoing treatment with isoniazid, developed signs of B6 hypovitaminosis. What is the cause of this condition?
a. Vitamin absorption slows down
b. A strong connection forms between vitamin and blood plasma proteins
*c. Isoniazid is a vitamin B6 antagonist
d. Vitamin elimination speeds up
e. Vitamin biotransformation speeds up
1134. A patient with infiltrative pulmonary tuberculosis, who was undergoing treatment with isoniazid, developed signs of B6 hypovitaminosis. What is the cause of this condition?
a. Vitamin elimination speeds up
b. Vitamin absorption slows down
c. Vitamin biotransformation speeds up
d. A strong connection forms between vitamin and blood plasma proteins
*e. Isoniazid is a vitamin B6 antagonist
1135. A patient with inflammation of the nasal mucosa and a disturbed sense of smell came to the otorhinolaryngology department. What area of the nasal mucosa is most likely to be affected in this case?
a. Common nasal meatus
b. Middle nasal meatus
c. Lower nasal meatus
d. Nasal septum
*e. Upper nasal meatus
1136. A patient with inflammation of the nasal mucosa and a disturbed sense of smell came to the otorhinolaryngology department. What area of the nasal mucosa is most likely to be affected in this case?
a. Lower nasal meatus
*b. Upper nasal meatus
c. Common nasal meatus
d. Middle nasal meatus
e. Nasal septum
1137. A patient with inflammation of the nasal mucosa and a disturbed sense of smell came to the otorhinolaryngology department. What area of the nasal mucosa is most likely to be affected in this case?
a. Lower nasal meatus
b. Nasal septum
*c. Upper nasal meatus
d. Middle nasal meatus
e. Common nasal meatus
1138. A patient with ischemic heart disease presents with increased blood plasma content of triglycerides and very low-density lipoproteins. What drug should be prescribed?
a. Dobutamine
*b. Fenofibrate
c. Amiodarone
d. Lisinopril
e. Famotidine
1139. A patient with ischemic heart disease presents with increased blood plasma content of triglycerides and very low-density lipoproteins. What drug should be prescribed?
a. Dobutamine
b. Amiodarone
*c. Fenofibrate
d. Famotidine
e. Lisinopril
1140. A patient with ischemic heart disease presents with increased blood plasma content of triglycerides and very low-density lipoproteins. What drug should be prescribed?
a. Famotidine
*b. Fenofibrate
c. Lisinopril
d. Dobutamine
e. Amiodarone
1141. A patient with knife wound of the neck presents with hemorrhage. Initial wound management revealed damage to the vessel that is located along the lateral edge of the sternocleidomastoid muscle. Name this vessel:
a. A) carotis interna
*b. V. jugularis externa
c. V. jugularis anterior
d. A) carotis externa
e. V. jugularis interna
1142. A patient with knife wound of the neck presents with hemorrhage. Initial wound management revealed damage to the vessel that is located along the lateral edge of the sternocleidomastoid muscle. Name this vessel:
a. A) carotis interna
b. V. jugularis interna
*c. V. jugularis externa
d. A) carotis externa
e. V. jugularis anterior
1143. A patient with knife wound of the neck presents with hemorrhage. Initial wound management revealed damage to the vessel that is located along the lateral edge of the sternocleidomastoid muscle. Name this vessel:
a. V. jugularis anterior
b. A) carotis externa
*c. V. jugularis externa
d. V. jugularis interna
e. A) carotis interna
1144. A patient with leukemia was prescribed 5-fluorouracil. What effect does this drug have?
*a. It inhibits DNA synthesis
b. It accelerates replication
c. It stimulates DNase
d. It inhibits transcription
e. It inhibits translation
1145. A patient with leukemia was prescribed 5-fluorouracil. What effect does this drug have?
a. It inhibits transcription
b. It inhibits translation
*c. It inhibits DNA synthesis
d. It accelerates replication
e. It stimulates DNase
1146. A patient with leukemia was prescribed 5-fluorouracil. What effect does this drug have?
a. It stimulates DNase
b. It inhibits translation
c. It inhibits transcription
*d. It inhibits DNA synthesis
e. It accelerates replication
1147. A patient with malignant tumor was prescribed a narcotic analgesic to relieve the unbearable pain. What is the mechanism of analgesic action of such drugs?
*a. Activation of opiate receptors
b. Inhibition of cholinergic receptors
c. Activation of D2 dopamine receptors
d. Inhibition of serotonin receptors
e. Inhibition of histamine receptors
1148. A patient with malignant tumor was prescribed a narcotic analgesic to relieve the unbearable pain. What is the mechanism of analgesic action of such drugs?
a. Inhibition of cholinergic receptors
*b. Activation of opiate receptors
c. Activation of D2 dopamine receptors
d. Inhibition of serotonin receptors
e. Inhibition of histamine receptors
1149. A patient with malignant tumor was prescribed a narcotic analgesic to relieve the unbearable pain. What is the mechanism of analgesic action of such drugs?
a. Inhibition of histamine receptors
b. Inhibition of cholinergic receptors
c. Inhibition of serotonin receptors
*d. Activation of opiate receptors
e. Activation of D2 dopamine receptors
1150. A patient with megaloblastic anemia was taking a water-soluble vitamin. Name this substance:
a. Ascorbic acid
b. Thiamine chloride
c. Tocopherol acetate
d. Pyridoxine
*e. Cyanocobalamin
1151. A patient with osteomyelitis of the mandible developed sepsis. Blood culture microbiology detects Gram-positive and catalase-positive cocci capable of growing in the presence of NaCl. What microorganisms are the likely cause of this disease?
a. Escherichia
b. Streptococci
*c. Staphylococci
d. Sarcinae
e. Corynebacteria
1152. A patient with osteomyelitis of the mandible developed sepsis. Blood culture microbiology detects Gram-positive and catalase-positive cocci capable of growing in the presence of NaCl. What microorganisms are the likely cause of this disease?
a. Sarcinae
b. Corynebacteria
c. Streptococci
d. Escherichia
*e. Staphylococci
1153. A patient with osteomyelitis of the mandible developed sepsis. Blood culture microbiology detects Gram-positive and catalase-positive cocci capable of growing in the presence of NaCl. What microorganisms are the likely cause of this disease?
a. Sarcinae
b. Streptococci
c. Escherichia
d. Corynebacteria
*e. Staphylococci
1154. A patient with parodontosis was prescribed a fat-soluble vitamin that actively participates in redox processes in the organism. This antioxidant is a growth factor, has antixerophthalmic action, and contributes to maintenance of normal vision. In dental practice it is used to accelerate mucosal re-epithelization during parodontosis. Name this substance:
a. Menadione (Vicasolum)
b. Cyanocobalamin
c. Ergocalciferol
*d. Retinol acetate
e. Tocopherol acetate
1155. A patient with parodontosis was prescribed a fat-soluble vitamin that actively participates in redox processes in the organism. This antioxidant is a growth factor, has antixerophthalmic action, and contributes to maintenance of normal vision. In dental practice it is used to accelerate mucosal re-epithelization during parodontosis. Name this substance:
a. Menadione (Vicasolum)
b. Ergocalciferol
c. Tocopherol acetate
d. Cyanocobalamin
*e. Retinol acetate
1156. A patient with parodontosis was prescribed a fat-soluble vitamin that actively participates in redox processes in the organism. This antioxidant is a growth factor, has antixerophthalmic action, and contributes to maintenance of normal vision. In dental practice it is used to accelerate mucosal re-epithelization during parodontosis. Name this substance:
a. Tocopherol acetate
*b. Retinol acetate
c. Menadione (Vicasolum)
d. Ergocalciferol
e. Cyanocobalamin
1157. A patient with peptic ulcer disease of the stomach is prescribed a drug that blocks histamine H2 receptors. Select this drug from the list:
*a. Famotidine
b. Atropine sulfate
c. Dithylin (Suxamethonium)
d. Bisacodyl
e. Omeprazole
1158. A patient with peptic ulcer disease of the stomach is prescribed a drug that blocks histamine H2 receptors. Select this drug from the list:
a. Bisacodyl
*b. Famotidine
c. Omeprazole
d. Dithylin (Suxamethonium)
e. Atropine sulfate
1159. A patient with peptic ulcer disease of the stomach is prescribed a drug that blocks histamine H2 receptors. Select this drug from the list:
a. Bisacodyl
b. Omeprazole
c. Dithylin (Suxamethonium)
d. Atropine sulfate
*e. Famotidine
1160. A patient with pulmonary tuberculosis is prescribed rifampicin that inhibits RNA-polymerase enzyme at the stage of initiation of the following process:
a. Elongation
b. Translation
*c. Transcription
d. Termination
e. Replication
1161. A patient with pulmonary tuberculosis is prescribed rifampicin that inhibits RNA-polymerase enzyme at the stage of initiation of the following process:
a. Replication
*b. Transcription
c. Elongation
d. Translation
e. Termination
1162. A patient with pulmonary tuberculosis is prescribed rifampicin that inhibits RNA-polymerase enzyme at the stage of initiation of the following process:
a. Translation
b. Elongation
*c. Transcription
d. Termination
e. Replication
1163. A patient with severe poisoning caused by an unknown substance was brought into an admission room. The patient is in a state of acute cardiac insufficiency. What cardiac glycosides must be given to the patient as an emergency aid?
a. Anaprilin (Propranolol)
b. Salbutamol
*c. Corglycon (Convallatoxin)
d. Cordiamin (Nikethamide)
e. Naphthyzin (Naphazoline)
1164. A patient with severe poisoning caused by an unknown substance was brought into an admission room. The patient is in a state of acute cardiac insufficiency. What cardiac glycosides must be given to the patient as an emergency aid?
a. Cordiamin (Nikethamide)
b. Anaprilin (Propranolol)
c. Salbutamol
*d. Corglycon (Convallatoxin)
e. Naphthyzin (Naphazoline)
1165. A patient with severe poisoning caused by an unknown substance was brought into an admission room. The patient is in a state of acute cardiac insufficiency. What cardiac glycosides must be given to the patient as an emergency aid?
a. Naphthyzin (Naphazoline)
b. Cordiamin (Nikethamide)
c. Anaprilin (Propranolol)
*d. Corglycon (Convallatoxin)
e. Salbutamol
1166. A patient with signs of anxiety, fear, uncertainty, and mental strain was prescribed diazepam. What mechanism of tranquilizing action can be observed in this case?
*a. Interaction with benzodiazepine receptors
b. Interaction with adrenergic receptors
c. Interaction with cholinergic receptors
d. Interaction with serotonin receptors
e. Interaction with dopamine receptors
1167. A patient with signs of anxiety, fear, uncertainty, and mental strain was prescribed diazepam. What mechanism of tranquilizing action can be observed in this case?
a. Interaction with cholinergic receptors
b. Interaction with dopamine receptors
*c. Interaction with benzodiazepine receptors
d. Interaction with serotonin receptors
e. Interaction with adrenergic receptors
1168. A patient with signs of anxiety, fear, uncertainty, and mental strain was prescribed diazepam. What mechanism of tranquilizing action can be observed in this case?
a. Interaction with cholinergic receptors
b. Interaction with dopamine receptors
c. Interaction with serotonin receptors
d. Interaction with adrenergic receptors
*e. Interaction with benzodiazepine receptors
1169. A patient with skin burns was delivered to a hospital. To clean the wound from necrotic tissues and mucus the doctor prescribed an enzymatic drug for topical treatment. Name this drug:
a. Asparaginase
*b. Tripsin
c. Pancreatin
d. Streptokinase
e. Pepsin
1170. A patient with skin burns was delivered to a hospital. To clean the wound from necrotic tissues and mucus the doctor prescribed an enzymatic drug for topical treatment. Name this drug:
a. Pepsin
*b. Tripsin
c. Asparaginase
d. Streptokinase
e. Pancreatin
1171. A patient with skin burns was delivered to a hospital. To clean the wound from necrotic tissues and mucus the doctor prescribed an enzymatic drug for topical treatment. Name this drug:
a. Streptokinase
b. Asparaginase
c. Pancreatin
*d. Tripsin
e. Pepsin
1172. A patient with streptococcal pneumonia was prescribed an antimicrobial agent that disrupts microbial membranes. Name this drug:
*a. Benzylpenicillin sodium salt
b. Gentamicin sulfate
c. Azithromycin
d. Doxycycline hydrochloride
e. Erythromycin
1173. A patient with streptococcal pneumonia was prescribed an antimicrobial agent that disrupts microbial membranes. Name this drug:
a. Azithromycin
b. Erythromycin
c. Doxycycline hydrochloride
*d. Benzylpenicillin sodium salt
e. Gentamicin sulfate
1174. A patient with streptococcal pneumonia was prescribed an antimicrobial agent that disrupts microbial membranes. Name this drug:
a. Doxycycline hydrochloride
b. Gentamicin sulfate
c. Azithromycin
d. Erythromycin
*e. Benzylpenicillin sodium salt
1175. A patient with syphilis developed pale spots on the skin of his neck. What disturbance of pigment metabolism is it?
a. Lentigo
b. Xeroderma
c. Melanoderma
d. Porphyria
*e. Leukoderma
1176. A patient with syphilis developed pale spots on the skin of his neck. What disturbance of pigment metabolism is it?
a. Melanoderma
b. Lentigo
*c. Leukoderma
d. Porphyria
e. Xeroderma
1177. A patient with syphilis developed pale spots on the skin of his neck. What disturbance of pigment metabolism is it?
a. Porphyria
b. Lentigo
c. Xeroderma
*d. Leukoderma
e. Melanoderma
1178. A patient with thrombophlebitis was prescribed an indirect anticoagulant syncoumar. Specify the time interval, after which the maximum anticoagulant effect should be expected.
*a. 24-72 hours
b. 5-10 minutes
c. 6-12 hours
d. 3-6 hours
e. 12-24 hours
1179. A patient with thrombophlebitis was prescribed an indirect anticoagulant syncoumar. Specify the time interval, after which the maximum anticoagulant effect should be expected.
a. 12-24 hours
b. 6-12 hours
c. 5-10 minutes
d. 3-6 hours
*e. 24-72 hours
1180. A patient with thrombophlebitis was prescribed an indirect anticoagulant syncoumar. Specify the time interval, after which the maximum anticoagulant effect should be expected.
a. 6-12 hours
b. 5-10 minutes
*c. 24-72 hours
d. 3-6 hours
e. 12-24 hours
1181. A patient with trauma has an epidural hematoma in the temporal region. What artery was damaged?
a. Anterior cerebral artery
*b. Middle meningeal artery
c. Medial cerebral artery
d. Anterior meningeal artery
e. Posterior communicating artery
1182. A patient with trauma has an epidural hematoma in the temporal region. What artery was damaged?
a. Anterior cerebral artery
b. Anterior meningeal artery
c. Posterior communicating artery
d. Medial cerebral artery
*e. Middle meningeal artery
1183. A patient with trauma has an epidural hematoma in the temporal region. What artery was damaged?
a. Posterior communicating artery
*b. Middle meningeal artery
c. Anterior cerebral artery
d. Medial cerebral artery
e. Anterior meningeal artery
1184. A patient with trigeminal neuralgia was given parenterally a non-narcotic analgesic with rapid onset and short action. This analgesic is manufactured in tablets and ampoules. What drug was the patient administered?
a. Mefenamic acid
*b. Analgin (Metamizole)
c. Indometacin
d. Piroxicam
e. Ibuprofen
1185. A patient with trigeminal neuralgia was given parenterally a non-narcotic analgesic with rapid onset and short action. This analgesic is manufactured in tablets and ampoules. What drug was the patient administered?
a. Piroxicam
b. Ibuprofen
c. Indometacin
d. Mefenamic acid
*e. Analgin (Metamizole)
1186. A patient with urolithiasis was given a narcotic analgesic with antispasmodic effect. Name this drug:
a. Analgin (Metamizole)
b. Mefenamic acid
*c. Promedol (Trimeperidine)
d. Ibuprofen
e. Indomethacin
1187. A patient with urolithiasis was given a narcotic analgesic with antispasmodic effect. Name this drug:
a. Ibuprofen
b. Analgin (Metamizole)
*c. Promedol (Trimeperidine)
d. Mefenamic acid
e. Indomethacin
1188. A patient with urolithiasis was given a narcotic analgesic with antispasmodic effect. Name this drug:
a. Ibuprofen
b. Analgin (Metamizole)
c. Mefenamic acid
*d. Promedol (Trimeperidine)
e. Indomethacin
1189. A patient with wrist wound started to develop an edema. At what stage of local circulatory disturbance does it usually occur?
a. Prestasis
b. Arteriolar spasm
*c. Arterial hyperemia
d. Stasis
e. Venous hyperemia
1190. A patient with wrist wound started to develop an edema. At what stage of local circulatory disturbance does it usually occur?
a. Stasis
b. Arteriolar spasm
c. Venous hyperemia
d. Prestasis
*e. Arterial hyperemia
1191. A patient with wrist wound started to develop an edema. At what stage of local circulatory disturbance does it usually occur?
a. Venous hyperemia
b. Prestasis
c. Stasis
*d. Arterial hyperemia
e. Arteriolar spasm
1192. A patient, who was taking a blood pressure-lowering drug, complains of dry mouth. What antihypertensive agent has such a side effect?
a. Adelphane  (Reserpine + Dihydralazine)
b. Dibazol (Bendazol)
*c. Clophelin (Clonidine)
d. Anaprilin (Propranolol)
e. Verapamil
1193. A patient, who was taking a blood pressure-lowering drug, complains of dry mouth. What antihypertensive agent has such a side effect?
a. Anaprilin (Propranolol)
*b. Clophelin (Clonidine)
c. Verapamil
d. Adelphane  (Reserpine + Dihydralazine)
e. Dibazol (Bendazol)
1194. A patient, who was taking a blood pressure-lowering drug, complains of dry mouth. What antihypertensive agent has such a side effect?
a. Dibazol (Bendazol)
*b. Clophelin (Clonidine)
c. Verapamil
d. Adelphane  (Reserpine + Dihydralazine)
e. Anaprilin (Propranolol)
1195. A patient, who works in underground mining, developed pulmonary fibrosis. In this case spirometry shows the following:
*a. Decreased vital capacity of lungs
b. Normal airway resistance
c. Decreased airway resistance
d. Increased vital capacity of lungs
e. Increased airway resistance
1196. A patient, who works in underground mining, developed pulmonary fibrosis. In this case spirometry shows the following:
a. Decreased airway resistance
*b. Decreased vital capacity of lungs
c. Increased airway resistance
d. Increased vital capacity of lungs
e. Normal airway resistance
1197. A patient, who works in underground mining, developed pulmonary fibrosis. In this case spirometry shows the following:
a. Increased vital capacity of lungs
b. Increased airway resistance
c. Decreased airway resistance
*d. Decreased vital capacity of lungs
e. Normal airway resistance
1198. A person bitten by a stray dog came to the surgeon's office. Wide lacerated wounds are localized on the patient's face. What rabies-prevention aid should be provided to this person?
a. Hospitalize the patient and continue to monitor his condition
*b. Begin immunization with antirabic vaccine
c. Immediately administer DPT vaccine
d. Prescribe combined vitamin therapy
e. Immediately administer normal gamma globulin
1199. A person bitten by a stray dog came to the surgeon's office. Wide lacerated wounds are localized on the patient's face. What rabies-prevention aid should be provided to this person?
a. Immediately administer normal gamma globulin
b. Prescribe combined vitamin therapy
c. Immediately administer DPT vaccine
*d. Begin immunization with antirabic vaccine
e. Hospitalize the patient and continue to monitor his condition
1200. A person bitten by a stray dog came to the surgeon's office. Wide lacerated wounds are localized on the patient's face. What rabies-prevention aid should be provided to this person?
a. Prescribe combined vitamin therapy
b. Immediately administer normal gamma globulin
c. Immediately administer DPT vaccine
d. Hospitalize the patient and continue to monitor his condition
*e. Begin immunization with antirabic vaccine
1201. A person came to the admission room with complaints of dry mouth, photophobia, and visual disturbances. Objective examination detected dry hyperemic skin, dilated pupils, and tachycardia. This person was diagnosed with Atropa belladonna alkaloids poisoning. What medicine must be used in this case?
*a. Proserin (Neostigmine)
b. Dipyroxime (Trimedoxime bromide)
c. Pilocarpine
d. Aceclidine
e. Armin
1202. A person came to the admission room with complaints of dry mouth, photophobia, and visual disturbances. Objective examination detected dry hyperemic skin, dilated pupils, and tachycardia. This person was diagnosed with Atropa belladonna alkaloids poisoning. What medicine must be used in this case?
a. Aceclidine
b. Armin
c. Pilocarpine
d. Dipyroxime (Trimedoxime bromide)
*e. Proserin (Neostigmine)
1203. A person came to the admission room with complaints of dry mouth, photophobia, and visual disturbances. Objective examination detected dry hyperemic skin, dilated pupils, and tachycardia. This person was diagnosed with Atropa belladonna alkaloids poisoning. What medicine must be used in this case?
a. Pilocarpine
b. Aceclidine
c. Dipyroxime (Trimedoxime bromide)
d. Armin
*e. Proserin (Neostigmine)
1204. A person complains that lifting the lower jaw is problematic because of an incised wound in the area of the gonial angle. What muscle is likely to be damaged in this case?
*a. M. masseter
b. M. pterigoideus lateralis
c. M. orbicularis oris
d. M. pterigoideus medialis
e. M. temporalis
1205. A person complains that lifting the lower jaw is problematic because of an incised wound in the area of the gonial angle. What muscle is likely to be damaged in this case?
*a. M. masseter
b. M. temporalis
c. M. pterigoideus medialis
d. M. pterigoideus lateralis
e. M. orbicularis oris
1206. A person complains that lifting the lower jaw is problematic because of an incised wound in the area of the gonial angle. What muscle is likely to be damaged in this case?
a. M. pterigoideus medialis
b. M. pterigoideus lateralis
c. M. temporalis
d. M. orbicularis oris
*e. M. masseter
1207. A person develops alimentary (nutritional) hyperglycemia after eating, which stimulates secretion of the following hormone:
*a. Insulin
b. Noradrenaline
c. Adrenaline
d. Glucagon
e. Cortisol
1208. A person develops alimentary (nutritional) hyperglycemia after eating, which stimulates secretion of the following hormone:
*a. Insulin
b. Noradrenaline
c. Glucagon
d. Cortisol
e. Adrenaline
1209. A person develops alimentary (nutritional) hyperglycemia after eating, which stimulates secretion of the following hormone:
a. Cortisol
b. Noradrenaline
c. Adrenaline
d. Glucagon
*e. Insulin
1210. A person died of potassium cyanide poisoning. The death of this person was caused by a compound formed by cyanide and a certain other substance. Name this substance.
a. DNA
*b. Cytochrome
c. ATP
d. tRNA
e. Riboflavin
1211. A person died of potassium cyanide poisoning. The death of this person was caused by a compound formed by cyanide and a certain other substance. Name this substance.
a. Riboflavin
b. tRNA
c. ATP
d. DNA
*e. Cytochrome
1212. A person died of potassium cyanide poisoning. The death of this person was caused by a compound formed by cyanide and a certain other substance. Name this substance.
a. tRNA
b. Riboflavin
c. DNA
*d. Cytochrome
e. ATP
1213. A person has an upper jaw injury - one of the first premolars was knocked out. What maxillary process is damaged in this case?
*a. Alveolar
b. Orbital
c. Frontal
d. Zygomatic
e. Palatine
1214. A person has an upper jaw injury - one of the first premolars was knocked out. What maxillary process is damaged in this case?
*a. Alveolar
b. Zygomatic
c. Palatine
d. Frontal
e. Orbital
1215. A person has an upper jaw injury - one of the first premolars was knocked out. What maxillary process is damaged in this case?
a. Frontal
b. Zygomatic
c. Orbital
*d. Alveolar
e. Palatine
1216. A person in a hot weather for a long time had no water, which resulted in a severe thirst. What indicator of blood homeostasis was affected, leading to the development of this sensation?
*a. Plasma osmotic pressure
b. pH
c. Glucose level
d. Hematocrit
e. Plasma oncotic pressure
1217. A person in a hot weather for a long time had no water, which resulted in a severe thirst. What indicator of blood homeostasis was affected, leading to the development of this sensation?
a. Hematocrit
*b. Plasma osmotic pressure
c. Glucose level
d. pH
e. Plasma oncotic pressure
1218. A person in a hot weather for a long time had no water, which resulted in a severe thirst. What indicator of blood homeostasis was affected, leading to the development of this sensation?
a. pH
b. Plasma oncotic pressure
*c. Plasma osmotic pressure
d. Hematocrit
e. Glucose level
1219. A person in the state of nervous tension develops transverse wrinkles on the forehead. What muscle contracts to produce this result?
a. M. procerus
*b. M. occipitofrontalis
c. M. temporoparietalis
d. M. auricularis anterior
e. M. corrugator supercilii
1220. A person in the state of nervous tension develops transverse wrinkles on the forehead. What muscle contracts to produce this result?
a. M. temporoparietalis
b. M. auricularis anterior
*c. M. occipitofrontalis
d. M. corrugator supercilii
e. M. procerus
1221. A person in the state of nervous tension develops transverse wrinkles on the forehead. What muscle contracts to produce this result?
a. M. temporoparietalis
b. M. procerus
c. M. auricularis anterior
d. M. corrugator supercilii
*e. M. occipitofrontalis
1222. A person with trauma bleeds from a head wound. Where should the carotid artery be pressed to temporarily stop the bleeding?
*a. To the anterior tubercle on the transverse process of the C6 vertebra
b. To the anterior tubercle on the transverse process of the C5 vertebra
c. To the spine in the upper portion of the neck
d. To the anterior tubercle on the transverse process of the C7 vertebra
e. To the anterior tubercle on the transverse process of the C4 vertebra
1223. A person with trauma bleeds from a head wound. Where should the carotid artery be pressed to temporarily stop the bleeding?
a. To the anterior tubercle on the transverse process of the C5 vertebra
b. To the anterior tubercle on the transverse process of the C7 vertebra
c. To the anterior tubercle on the transverse process of the C4 vertebra
d. To the spine in the upper portion of the neck
*e. To the anterior tubercle on the transverse process of the C6 vertebra
1224. A person with trauma bleeds from a head wound. Where should the carotid artery be pressed to temporarily stop the bleeding?
a. To the spine in the upper portion of the neck
b. To the anterior tubercle on the transverse process of the C5 vertebra
c. To the anterior tubercle on the transverse process of the C7 vertebra
d. To the anterior tubercle on the transverse process of the C4 vertebra
*e. To the anterior tubercle on the transverse process of the C6 vertebra
1225. A postmortem examination of the body of a 59-year-old woman, who died of acute heart failure, detected in the left ventricular wall an irregularly-shaped yellow area, 2.5x2 cm in size, with a doughy consistency. In the corresponding place on the endocardium a thrombus was formed, while on the epicardium there were fibrinous deposits. What was the localization of the infarction in relation to the cardiac wall in this case?
*a. Transmural
b. -
c. Subendocardial
d. Subepicardial
e. Intramural
1226. A postmortem examination of the body of a 59-year-old woman, who died of acute heart failure, detected in the left ventricular wall an irregularly-shaped yellow area, 2.5x2 cm in size, with a doughy consistency. In the corresponding place on the endocardium a thrombus was formed, while on the epicardium there were fibrinous deposits. What was the localization of the infarction in relation to the cardiac wall in this case?
a. -
*b. Transmural
c. Intramural
d. Subendocardial
e. Subepicardial
1227. A postmortem examination of the body of a 59-year-old woman, who died of acute heart failure, detected in the left ventricular wall an irregularly-shaped yellow area, 2.5x2 cm in size, with a doughy consistency. In the corresponding place on the endocardium a thrombus was formed, while on the epicardium there were fibrinous deposits. What was the localization of the infarction in relation to the cardiac wall in this case?
a. Subepicardial
b. -
*c. Transmural
d. Intramural
e. Subendocardial
1228. A pregnant woman developed severe toxemia with exhausting recurrent vomiting throughout a day. By the end of the day she developed tetanic convulsions and dehydration. The described changes were caused by the following type of acid-base imbalance:
*a. Nongaseous excretory alkalosis
b. Gaseous acidosis
c. Nongaseous excretory acidosis
d. Gaseous alkalosis
e. Nongaseous metabolic acidosis
1229. A pregnant woman developed severe toxemia with exhausting recurrent vomiting throughout a day. By the end of the day she developed tetanic convulsions and dehydration. The described changes were caused by the following type of acid-base imbalance:
*a. Nongaseous excretory alkalosis
b. Gaseous alkalosis
c. Nongaseous excretory acidosis
d. Gaseous acidosis
e. Nongaseous metabolic acidosis
1230. A pregnant woman developed severe toxemia with exhausting recurrent vomiting throughout a day. By the end of the day she developed tetanic convulsions and dehydration. The described changes were caused by the following type of acid-base imbalance:
a. Nongaseous metabolic acidosis
b. Gaseous acidosis
c. Nongaseous excretory acidosis
*d. Nongaseous excretory alkalosis
e. Gaseous alkalosis
1231. A proteolytic enzyme was prescribed for the treatment of abscessing parodontosis. Name this drug:
a. Actilyse (Alteplase)
b. Contrykal (Aprotinin)
*c. Crystalline trypsin
d. Lidase
e. Streptoliase
1232. A proteolytic enzyme was prescribed for the treatment of abscessing parodontosis. Name this drug:
a. Actilyse (Alteplase)
b. Contrykal (Aprotinin)
*c. Crystalline trypsin
d. Streptoliase
e. Lidase
1233. A proteolytic enzyme was prescribed for the treatment of abscessing parodontosis. Name this drug:
a. Contrykal (Aprotinin)
b. Streptoliase
c. Lidase
*d. Crystalline trypsin
e. Actilyse (Alteplase)
1234. A sample obtained from the patient's thyroid gland was processed with silver salts, which revealed large argyrophilic cells in the follicular walls. What hormone is being secreted by these cells?
*a. Calcitonin
b. Parathyrin
c. Thyroxine
d. Adrenaline
e. Aldosterone
1235. A sample obtained from the patient's thyroid gland was processed with silver salts, which revealed large argyrophilic cells in the follicular walls. What hormone is being secreted by these cells?
a. Adrenaline
*b. Calcitonin
c. Parathyrin
d. Aldosterone
e. Thyroxine
1236. A sample obtained from the patient's thyroid gland was processed with silver salts, which revealed large argyrophilic cells in the follicular walls. What hormone is being secreted by these cells?
a. Parathyrin
b. Adrenaline
c. Aldosterone
d. Thyroxine
*e. Calcitonin
1237. A sample of the patient's blood was taken for analysis in the presence of heparin. By its chemical structure, this anticoagulant belongs to:
*a. Glycosaminoglycans
b. Simple proteins
c. Triacylglycerols
d. Phospholipids
e. Hemeproteins
1238. A sample of the patient's blood was taken for analysis in the presence of heparin. By its chemical structure, this anticoagulant belongs to:
a. Phospholipids
b. Hemeproteins
c. Triacylglycerols
*d. Glycosaminoglycans
e. Simple proteins
1239. A sample of the patient's blood was taken for analysis in the presence of heparin. By its chemical structure, this anticoagulant belongs to:
a. Triacylglycerols
b. Phospholipids
c. Hemeproteins
d. Simple proteins
*e. Glycosaminoglycans
1240. A scar made up of connective tissue has formed at the site of a healed wound. What substance is the main component of this type of connective tissue?
a. Chondroitin sulfate
*b. Collagen
c. Hyaluronic acid
d. Elastin
e. Keratan sulfate
1241. A scar made up of connective tissue has formed at the site of a healed wound. What substance is the main component of this type of connective tissue?
a. Elastin
b. Keratan sulfate
c. Chondroitin sulfate
d. Hyaluronic acid
*e. Collagen
1242. A scar made up of connective tissue has formed at the site of a healed wound. What substance is the main component of this type of connective tissue?
a. Hyaluronic acid
b. Keratan sulfate
*c. Collagen
d. Chondroitin sulfate
e. Elastin
1243. A shepherd tended to the sheep with the help of his dogs. Gradually he developed pain in his chest and started coughing blood. X-ray shows a spherical structure inhis lungs. Immunology testing confirmed the provisional diagnosis. What helminth is the likely cause of this condition?
a. Hymenolepis nana
*b. Echinococcus
c. Liver fluke
d. Taenia solium
e. Diphyllobothrium latum
1244. A shepherd tended to the sheep with the help of his dogs. Gradually he developed pain in his chest and started coughing blood. X-ray shows a spherical structure inhis lungs. Immunology testing confirmed the provisional diagnosis. What helminth is the likely cause of this condition?
a. Hymenolepis nana
b. Diphyllobothrium latum
*c. Echinococcus
d. Liver fluke
e. Taenia solium
1245. A shepherd tended to the sheep with the help of his dogs. Gradually he developed pain in his chest and started coughing blood. X-ray shows a spherical structure inhis lungs. Immunology testing confirmed the provisional diagnosis. What helminth is the likely cause of this condition?
a. Liver fluke
b. Diphyllobothrium latum
*c. Echinococcus
d. Taenia solium
e. Hymenolepis nana
1246. A sick child has gingivitis caused by anaerobic infection. The child needs to be prescribed an antimicrobial drug that belongs to the following class:
a. Nitrofurans
b. Polymyxins
c. Sulfonamides
d. Aminoglycosides
*e. Nitroimidazoles
1247. A sick child has gingivitis caused by anaerobic infection. The child needs to be prescribed an antimicrobial drug that belongs to the following class:
a. Polymyxins
*b. Nitroimidazoles
c. Aminoglycosides
d. Sulfonamides
e. Nitrofurans
1248. A sick child has gingivitis caused by anaerobic infection. The child needs to be prescribed an antimicrobial drug that belongs to the following class:
a. Sulfonamides
b. Nitrofurans
c. Aminoglycosides
*d. Nitroimidazoles
e. Polymyxins
1249. A sick child has signs of achondroplasia (dwarfism). It is known that this disease is monogenic and the gene that causes the development of this anomaly is dominant. The natural brother of this child has normal development. Genotypically, the healthy child is:
*a. 
b. b
c. 
d. 
e. 
1250. A sick child has signs of achondroplasia (dwarfism). It is known that this disease is monogenic and the gene that causes the development of this anomaly is dominant. The natural brother of this child has normal development. Genotypically, the healthy child is:
a. 
*b. 
c. b
d. 
e. 
1251. A sick child has signs of achondroplasia (dwarfism). It is known that this disease is monogenic and the gene that causes the development of this anomaly is dominant. The natural brother of this child has normal development. Genotypically, the healthy child is:
a. 
b. 
c. 
d. b
*e. 
1252. A sick child is suspected to have tuberculosis and is referred for Mantoux test. 24 hours later the place of allergen injection became swollen, hyperemic, and tender. What main components determine the development of this reaction?
a. Macrophages, B lymphocytes, and monocytes
b. Granulocytes, T-lymphocytes, and IgG
*c. Mononuclear cells, T-lymphocytes, and lymphokines
d. Plasma cells, T-lymphocytes, and lymphokines
e. B-lymphocytes and IgM
1253. A sick child is suspected to have tuberculosis and is referred for Mantoux test. 24 hours later the place of allergen injection became swollen, hyperemic, and tender. What main components determine the development of this reaction?
a. Plasma cells, T-lymphocytes, and lymphokines
*b. Mononuclear cells, T-lymphocytes, and lymphokines
c. Granulocytes, T-lymphocytes, and IgG
d. B-lymphocytes and IgM
e. Macrophages, B lymphocytes, and monocytes
1254. A sick child is suspected to have tuberculosis and is referred for Mantoux test. 24 hours later the place of allergen injection became swollen, hyperemic, and tender. What main components determine the development of this reaction?
a. Plasma cells, T-lymphocytes, and lymphokines
*b. Mononuclear cells, T-lymphocytes, and lymphokines
c. Macrophages, B lymphocytes, and monocytes
d. Granulocytes, T-lymphocytes, and IgG
e. B-lymphocytes and IgM
1255. A skin neoplasm was removed from a patient. The neoplasm is a dense node with a papillary surface that resembles a cauliflower. Microscopically the tumor consists of numerous papillae. Its parenchyma is formed from the covering epithelium with increased number of layers. The epithelium retains the cell polarity, as well as its stratification and intactness of the proper membrane. The tumor stroma is located within the center of the papillae. Make the diagnosis:
a. Adenoma
b. Fibroadenoma
c. Cystadenoma
d. Fibroma
*e. Papilloma
1256. A skin neoplasm was removed from a patient. The neoplasm is a dense node with a papillary surface that resembles a cauliflower. Microscopically the tumor consists of numerous papillae. Its parenchyma is formed from the covering epithelium with increased number of layers. The epithelium retains the cell polarity, as well as its stratification and intactness of the proper membrane. The tumor stroma is located within the center of the papillae. Make the diagnosis:
a. Cystadenoma
b. Fibroma
c. Fibroadenoma
*d. Papilloma
e. Adenoma
1257. A skin neoplasm was removed from a patient. The neoplasm is a dense node with a papillary surface that resembles a cauliflower. Microscopically the tumor consists of numerous papillae. Its parenchyma is formed from the covering epithelium with increased number of layers. The epithelium retains the cell polarity, as well as its stratification and intactness of the proper membrane. The tumor stroma is located within the center of the papillae. Make the diagnosis:
a. Fibroma
b. Cystadenoma
c. Adenoma
d. Fibroadenoma
*e. Papilloma
1258. A slide mount of an ovary presents a rounded structure with glandular cells that contain lipid droplets. Name this structure:
*a. Corpus luteum
b. Primary ovarian follicle
c. Corpus albicans
d. Primordial ovarian follicle
e. Mature ovarian follicle
1259. A slide mount of an ovary presents a rounded structure with glandular cells that contain lipid droplets. Name this structure:
a. Primordial ovarian follicle
b. Corpus albicans
c. Mature ovarian follicle
d. Primary ovarian follicle
*e. Corpus luteum
1260. A slide mount of an ovary presents a rounded structure with glandular cells that contain lipid droplets. Name this structure:
a. Primordial ovarian follicle
b. Primary ovarian follicle
c. Mature ovarian follicle
d. Corpus albicans
*e. Corpus luteum
1261. A small amount of specific antibodies was detected in the blood of an infectious patient, which indicates inhibited function of certain connective tissue cells. Name these cells.
a. Macrophages
*b. Plasma cells
c. Labrocytes
d. Lymphocytes
e. Neutrophilic granulocytes
1262. A small amount of specific antibodies was detected in the blood of an infectious patient, which indicates inhibited function of certain connective tissue cells. Name these cells.
a. Neutrophilic granulocytes
*b. Plasma cells
c. Macrophages
d. Lymphocytes
e. Labrocytes
1263. A small amount of specific antibodies was detected in the blood of an infectious patient, which indicates inhibited function of certain connective tissue cells. Name these cells.
a. Neutrophilic granulocytes
b. Macrophages
c. Lymphocytes
d. Labrocytes
*e. Plasma cells
1264. A smear specimen of human red bone marrow shows, among myeloid cells and adipocytes, certain stellate cells with oxyphilic cytoplasm that are connected with their cellular processes. Name these cells:
*a. Reticular cells
b. Osteocytes
c. Fibroblasts
d. Macrophages
e. Dendritic cells
1265. A smear specimen of human red bone marrow shows, among myeloid cells and adipocytes, certain stellate cells with oxyphilic cytoplasm that are connected with their cellular processes. Name these cells:
a. Macrophages
b. Fibroblasts
c. Dendritic cells
*d. Reticular cells
e. Osteocytes
1266. A smear specimen of human red bone marrow shows, among myeloid cells and adipocytes, certain stellate cells with oxyphilic cytoplasm that are connected with their cellular processes. Name these cells:
a. Macrophages
b. Osteocytes
*c. Reticular cells
d. Dendritic cells
e. Fibroblasts
1267. A sputum sample obtained from a tuberculosis patient was sent to a bacteriological laboratory. Bacterioscopy of smear microslides for detection of the tubercle bacillus requires the following staining method:
*a. Ziehl-Neelsen
b. Zdrodovskyi
c. Romanovskyi
d. Gram
e. Burri-Gins
1268. A sputum sample obtained from a tuberculosis patient was sent to a bacteriological laboratory. Bacterioscopy of smear microslides for detection of the tubercle bacillus requires the following staining method:
a. Gram
b. Romanovskyi
c. Burri-Gins
d. Zdrodovskyi
*e. Ziehl-Neelsen
1269. A sputum sample obtained from a tuberculosis patient was sent to a bacteriological laboratory. Bacterioscopy of smear microslides for detection of the tubercle bacillus requires the following staining method:
a. Zdrodovskyi
*b. Ziehl-Neelsen
c. Gram
d. Burri-Gins
e. Romanovskyi
1270. A structural gene - a DNA molecule segment - was damaged. However, it did not result in amino acid replacement in the protein, because after a time this damage was corrected with specific enzymes. Name this DNA ability:
a. Reverse transcription
b. Transcription
*c. Repair
d. Mutation
e. Replication
1271. A structural gene - a DNA molecule segment - was damaged. However, it did not result in amino acid replacement in the protein, because after a time this damage was corrected with specific enzymes. Name this DNA ability:
a. Transcription
b. Replication
c. Reverse transcription
*d. Repair
e. Mutation
1272. A structural gene - a DNA molecule segment - was damaged. However, it did not result in amino acid replacement in the protein, because after a time this damage was corrected with specific enzymes. Name this DNA ability:
a. Transcription
b. Reverse transcription
c. Replication
*d. Repair
e. Mutation
1273. A structural gene - a segment of a DNA molecule - was damaged. However, it did not result in an amino acid replacement in the protein, because after a time the damage was corrected. It indicates such DNA ability as:
*a. Repair
b. Transcription
c. Mutation
d. Replication
e. Reverse transcription
1274. A structural gene - a segment of a DNA molecule - was damaged. However, it did not result in an amino acid replacement in the protein, because after a time the damage was corrected. It indicates such DNA ability as:
*a. Repair
b. Transcription
c. Replication
d. Reverse transcription
e. Mutation
1275. A structural gene - a segment of a DNA molecule - was damaged. However, it did not result in an amino acid replacement in the protein, because after a time the damage was corrected. It indicates such DNA ability as:
a. Replication
b. Mutation
*c. Repair
d. Transcription
e. Reverse transcription
1276. A student uses percussion to determine the cardiac border that projects on the anterior thoracic wall at the level of the third costal cartilage. What cardiac border is being determined?
*a. Upper
b. Left
c. Apex
d. Right
e. Lower
1277. A student uses percussion to determine the cardiac border that projects on the anterior thoracic wall at the level of the third costal cartilage. What cardiac border is being determined?
a. Lower
b. Apex
c. Right
*d. Upper
e. Left
1278. A student uses percussion to determine the cardiac border that projects on the anterior thoracic wall at the level of the third costal cartilage. What cardiac border is being determined?
a. Right
b. Left
c. Lower
d. Apex
*e. Upper
1279. A student, who throughout the semester was studying poorly, is emotionally tense during the final exam. Leading mechanism of emotional tension in this case is the lack of:
*a. Information
b. Time
c. Energy
d. Time and energy
e. Energy and information
1280. A student, who throughout the semester was studying poorly, is emotionally tense during the final exam. Leading mechanism of emotional tension in this case is the lack of:
*a. Information
b. Time and energy
c. Energy
d. Energy and information
e. Time
1281. A student, who throughout the semester was studying poorly, is emotionally tense during the final exam. Leading mechanism of emotional tension in this case is the lack of:
a. Time and energy
b. Energy
c. Energy and information
*d. Information
e. Time
1282. A student, who unexpectedly met his girlfriend, developed an increase in systemic arterial pressure. This pressure change was caused by the intensified realization of the following reflexes:
*a. Conditional sympathetic
b. Unconditional sympathetic
c. Unconditional parasympathetic
d. Conditional sympathetic and parasympathetic
e. Conditional parasympathetic
1283. A student, who unexpectedly met his girlfriend, developed an increase in systemic arterial pressure. This pressure change was caused by the intensified realization of the following reflexes:
a. Conditional parasympathetic
b. Unconditional parasympathetic
c. Conditional sympathetic and parasympathetic
d. Unconditional sympathetic
*e. Conditional sympathetic
1284. A student, who unexpectedly met his girlfriend, developed an increase in systemic arterial pressure. This pressure change was caused by the intensified realization of the following reflexes:
a. Unconditional sympathetic
b. Conditional sympathetic and parasympathetic
*c. Conditional sympathetic
d. Unconditional parasympathetic
e. Conditional parasympathetic
1285. A surgeon accidentally damaged a nerve that innervates mylohyoid muscle. Name this nerve:
*a. N. trigeminus
b. N. facialis
c. N. glossopharyngeus
d. N. hypoglossus
e. N. accessorius
1286. A surgeon accidentally damaged a nerve that innervates mylohyoid muscle. Name this nerve:
a. N. hypoglossus
b. N. accessorius
*c. N. trigeminus
d. N. facialis
e. N. glossopharyngeus
1287. A surgeon accidentally damaged a nerve that innervates mylohyoid muscle. Name this nerve:
a. N. hypoglossus
b. N. facialis
*c. N. trigeminus
d. N. accessorius
e. N. glossopharyngeus
1288. A surgeon must amputate the damaged part of the patient's foot along the line of Lisfranc joint. What ligament must be cut in this case?
*a. Medial interosseous tarsometatarsal ligament
b. Talonavicular ligament
c. Bifurcated ligament
d. Calcaneonavicular ligament
e. Talocalcaneal ligament
1289. A surgeon must amputate the damaged part of the patient's foot along the line of Lisfranc joint. What ligament must be cut in this case?
a. Bifurcated ligament
b. Talocalcaneal ligament
c. Talonavicular ligament
*d. Medial interosseous tarsometatarsal ligament
e. Calcaneonavicular ligament
1290. A surgeon must amputate the damaged part of the patient's foot along the line of Lisfranc joint. What ligament must be cut in this case?
a. Bifurcated ligament
b. Talonavicular ligament
c. Calcaneonavicular ligament
d. Talocalcaneal ligament
*e. Medial interosseous tarsometatarsal ligament
1291. A teenager with impaired visual acuity came to an ophthalmologist. The doctor explained that this condition was caused by a spasm of accommodation. What component of an eyeball is a part of accommodation apparatus?
*a. Ciliary muscle
b. Retina
c. Cornea
d. Sclera
e. Vitreous body
1292. A teenager with impaired visual acuity came to an ophthalmologist. The doctor explained that this condition was caused by a spasm of accommodation. What component of an eyeball is a part of accommodation apparatus?
*a. Ciliary muscle
b. Sclera
c. Retina
d. Vitreous body
e. Cornea
1293. A teenager with impaired visual acuity came to an ophthalmologist. The doctor explained that this condition was caused by a spasm of accommodation. What component of an eyeball is a part of accommodation apparatus?
*a. Ciliary muscle
b. Vitreous body
c. Sclera
d. Retina
e. Cornea
1294. A tooth has been extracted. Its crown is chisel-shaped, wide, with narrow edge. The root is cone-shaped and flattened from the sides. What tooth was extracted?
a. Lower canine
*b. Upper incisor
c. Lower premolar
d. Upper premolar
e. Lower incisor
1295. A tooth has been extracted. Its crown is chisel-shaped, wide, with narrow edge. The root is cone-shaped and flattened from the sides. What tooth was extracted?
a. Lower premolar
b. Upper premolar
c. Lower incisor
*d. Upper incisor
e. Lower canine
1296. A tooth has been extracted. Its crown is chisel-shaped, wide, with narrow edge. The root is cone-shaped and flattened from the sides. What tooth was extracted?
a. Upper premolar
b. Lower incisor
c. Lower canine
d. Lower premolar
*e. Upper incisor
1297. A topical anesthetic was applied to the tongue apex of an experiment participant. The resulting gustatory loss will make this person unable to feel the following taste:
*a. Sweet
b. Bitter
c. Sour and salty
d. Sour
e. Salty
1298. A topical anesthetic was applied to the tongue apex of an experiment participant. The resulting gustatory loss will make this person unable to feel the following taste:
a. Salty
b. Sour and salty
*c. Sweet
d. Sour
e. Bitter
1299. A topical anesthetic was applied to the tongue apex of an experiment participant. The resulting gustatory loss will make this person unable to feel the following taste:
a. Sour and salty
b. Sour
c. Bitter
d. Salty
*e. Sweet
1300. A tourist, who had been to one of the Far East countries, was hospitalized into the therapeutics unit with suspected pneumonia. Examination of his sputum and feces detected there lung fluke eggs. What food products are the most likely cause of lung fluke infestation?
a. Insufficiently thermally processed beef
b. Raw fruits and vegetables
c. Insufficiently thermally processed eggs
*d. Insufficiently thermally processed freshwater crabs
e. Insufficiently thermally processed pork
1301. A tourist, who had been to one of the Far East countries, was hospitalized into the therapeutics unit with suspected pneumonia. Examination of his sputum and feces detected there lung fluke eggs. What food products are the most likely cause of lung fluke infestation?
a. Insufficiently thermally processed eggs
b. Insufficiently thermally processed pork
*c. Insufficiently thermally processed freshwater crabs
d. Raw fruits and vegetables
e. Insufficiently thermally processed beef
1302. A tourist, who had been to one of the Far East countries, was hospitalized into the therapeutics unit with suspected pneumonia. Examination of his sputum and feces detected there lung fluke eggs. What food products are the most likely cause of lung fluke infestation?
a. Raw fruits and vegetables
b. Insufficiently thermally processed eggs
c. Insufficiently thermally processed pork
*d. Insufficiently thermally processed freshwater crabs
e. Insufficiently thermally processed beef
1303. A trauma patient has a fracture in the petrous part of the temporal bone. The fracture line passes behind the internal auditory foramen. What canal of the temporal bone was damaged?
*a. Facial canal
b. Musculotubal canal
c. Tympanic canal
d. Canaliculus of the chorda tympani
e. Carotid canal
1304. A trauma patient has a fracture in the petrous part of the temporal bone. The fracture line passes behind the internal auditory foramen. What canal of the temporal bone was damaged?
a. Carotid canal
b. Canaliculus of the chorda tympani
*c. Facial canal
d. Tympanic canal
e. Musculotubal canal
1305. A trauma patient has a fracture in the petrous part of the temporal bone. The fracture line passes behind the internal auditory foramen. What canal of the temporal bone was damaged?
a. Tympanic canal
b. Canaliculus of the chorda tympani
*c. Facial canal
d. Musculotubal canal
e. Carotid canal
1306. A trauma patient has wound in the temporal region, with trickle of bright-red blood streaming from it. What blood vessel is damaged?
a. A) maxillaris
*b. A) temporalis superficialis
c. A) facialis
d. A) auricularis posterior
e. A) occipitalis
1307. A trauma patient has wound in the temporal region, with trickle of bright-red blood streaming from it. What blood vessel is damaged?
a. A) occipitalis
*b. A) temporalis superficialis
c. A) maxillaris
d. A) facialis
e. A) auricularis posterior
1308. A trauma patient has wound in the temporal region, with trickle of bright-red blood streaming from it. What blood vessel is damaged?
a. A) occipitalis
b. A) auricularis posterior
*c. A) temporalis superficialis
d. A) maxillaris
e. A) facialis
1309. A traumatologist has diagnosed a patient with a fracture in the area of the canine fossa. This fossa is located on the:
*a. Maxilla
b. Zygomatic bone
c. Palatine bone
d. Mandible
e. Frontal bone
1310. A traumatologist has diagnosed a patient with a fracture in the area of the canine fossa. This fossa is located on the:
a. Frontal bone
*b. Maxilla
c. Mandible
d. Zygomatic bone
e. Palatine bone
1311. A traumatologist has diagnosed a patient with a fracture in the area of the canine fossa. This fossa is located on the:
a. Mandible
*b. Maxilla
c. Palatine bone
d. Frontal bone
e. Zygomatic bone
1312. A tumor is detected in one of the regions of the patient's brain, resulting in the patient's inability to maintain normal body temperature. What brain structure is damaged?
a. Cerebellum
b. Striatum
c. Thalamus
d. Substantia nigra
*e. Hypothalamus
1313. A tumor is detected in one of the regions of the patient's brain, resulting in the patient's inability to maintain normal body temperature. What brain structure is damaged?
a. Striatum
b. Cerebellum
c. Thalamus
d. Substantia nigra
*e. Hypothalamus
1314. A tumor is detected in one of the regions of the patient's brain, resulting in the patient's inability to maintain normal body temperature. What brain structure is damaged?
a. Substantia nigra
b. Thalamus
*c. Hypothalamus
d. Striatum
e. Cerebellum
1315. A urine sample was taken via a catheter from the urinary bladder of a 17-year-old young man. Microscopy of the urine precipitate in this case can detect cells of the epithelium that lines the urinary bladder. What epithelium is it?
*a. Transitional epithelium
b. Keratinized stratified epithelium
c. Non-stratified cuboidal epithelium
d. Non-stratified columnar epithelium
e. Non-keratinized stratified epithelium
1316. A urine sample was taken via a catheter from the urinary bladder of a 17-year-old young man. Microscopy of the urine precipitate in this case can detect cells of the epithelium that lines the urinary bladder. What epithelium is it?
a. Non-keratinized stratified epithelium
*b. Transitional epithelium
c. Non-stratified columnar epithelium
d. Keratinized stratified epithelium
e. Non-stratified cuboidal epithelium
1317. A urine sample was taken via a catheter from the urinary bladder of a 17-year-old young man. Microscopy of the urine precipitate in this case can detect cells of the epithelium that lines the urinary bladder. What epithelium is it?
a. Non-stratified cuboidal epithelium
*b. Transitional epithelium
c. Keratinized stratified epithelium
d. Non-keratinized stratified epithelium
e. Non-stratified columnar epithelium
1318. A victim of a traffic accident has lost thoracic respiration but retaines diaphragmal. The spinal cord is most likely to be damaged at:
a. I-II sacral segments
b. I-II lumbar segments
c. XI-XII cervical segments
d. I-II cervical segments
*e. VI-VII cervical segments
1319. A victim of a traffic accident has lost thoracic respiration but retaines diaphragmal. The spinal cord is most likely to be damaged at:
a. I-II sacral segments
b. XI-XII cervical segments
c. I-II lumbar segments
*d. VI-VII cervical segments
e. I-II cervical segments
1320. A victim of a traffic accident has lost thoracic respiration but retaines diaphragmal. The spinal cord is most likely to be damaged at:
a. XI-XII cervical segments
b. I-II cervical segments
*c. VI-VII cervical segments
d. I-II sacral segments
e. I-II lumbar segments
1321. A woman came to a dental clinic with complaints of severe toothache and  extreme sensitivity to sweet and sour foods and thermal stimuli. She has a history of frequent maxillary sinusitis on the right. Examination of her oral cavity detected a carious tooth - the maxillary right first premolar. The doctor suggested anesthetizing the tooth for further treatment. What nerve innervates this tooth?
*a. N. alveolaris superior medius
b. N. petrosus major
c. N. mandibularis
d. N. infraorbitalis
e. N. incisivus
1322. A woman came to a dental clinic with complaints of severe toothache and  extreme sensitivity to sweet and sour foods and thermal stimuli. She has a history of frequent maxillary sinusitis on the right. Examination of her oral cavity detected a carious tooth - the maxillary right first premolar. The doctor suggested anesthetizing the tooth for further treatment. What nerve innervates this tooth?
a. N. infraorbitalis
b. N. incisivus
c. N. mandibularis
d. N. petrosus major
*e. N. alveolaris superior medius
1323. A woman came to a dental clinic with complaints of severe toothache and  extreme sensitivity to sweet and sour foods and thermal stimuli. She has a history of frequent maxillary sinusitis on the right. Examination of her oral cavity detected a carious tooth - the maxillary right first premolar. The doctor suggested anesthetizing the tooth for further treatment. What nerve innervates this tooth?
a. N. mandibularis
b. N. infraorbitalis
c. N. incisivus
*d. N. alveolaris superior medius
e. N. petrosus major
1324. A woman complains of headache, muscle pain during swallowing, chewing, and eyeball movement, elevated temperature, swollen face and eyelids. The signs developed 1.5-2 months after she had eaten pork without sanitary certificate. What helminth can cause these signs in a human?
*a. Trichinella
b. Ascaris lumbricoides
c. Ancylostoma
d. Enterobius
e. Necator
1325. A woman complains of headache, muscle pain during swallowing, chewing, and eyeball movement, elevated temperature, swollen face and eyelids. The signs developed 1.5-2 months after she had eaten pork without sanitary certificate. What helminth can cause these signs in a human?
a. Ascaris lumbricoides
b. Ancylostoma
*c. Trichinella
d. Necator
e. Enterobius
1326. A woman complains of headache, muscle pain during swallowing, chewing, and eyeball movement, elevated temperature, swollen face and eyelids. The signs developed 1.5-2 months after she had eaten pork without sanitary certificate. What helminth can cause these signs in a human?
a. Enterobius
b. Necator
c. Ancylostoma
d. Ascaris lumbricoides
*e. Trichinella
1327. A woman complains of impaired gustatory sensitivity of her tongue. This disturbance can be caused by the damage to a certain nucleus of the medulla oblongata. Name this nucleus:
a. Dorsal nucleus of vagus nerve
*b. Solitary nucleus
c. Nucleus ambiguus
d. Inferior salivatory nucleus
e. Hypoglossal nucleus
1328. A woman complains of impaired gustatory sensitivity of her tongue. This disturbance can be caused by the damage to a certain nucleus of the medulla oblongata. Name this nucleus:
a. Hypoglossal nucleus
b. Inferior salivatory nucleus
*c. Solitary nucleus
d. Nucleus ambiguus
e. Dorsal nucleus of vagus nerve
1329. A woman complains of impaired gustatory sensitivity of her tongue. This disturbance can be caused by the damage to a certain nucleus of the medulla oblongata. Name this nucleus:
a. Inferior salivatory nucleus
b. Hypoglossal nucleus
*c. Solitary nucleus
d. Nucleus ambiguus
e. Dorsal nucleus of vagus nerve
1330. A woman complains of pain in her left lower jaw and lower teeth. What nerves are likely to be damaged in this case, causing these signs?
*a. Sensory fibers of the third branch of the  V pair of cranial nerves
b. Motor fibers of the third branch of the V pair of cranial nerves
c. The first branch of the V pair of cranial nerves
d. The second branch of the V pair of  cranial nerves
e. The VII pair of cranial nerves
1331. A woman complains of pain in her left lower jaw and lower teeth. What nerves are likely to be damaged in this case, causing these signs?
a. Motor fibers of the third branch of the V pair of cranial nerves
b. The first branch of the V pair of cranial nerves
*c. Sensory fibers of the third branch of the  V pair of cranial nerves
d. The second branch of the V pair of  cranial nerves
e. The VII pair of cranial nerves
1332. A woman complains of pain in her left lower jaw and lower teeth. What nerves are likely to be damaged in this case, causing these signs?
a. The VII pair of cranial nerves
b. Motor fibers of the third branch of the V pair of cranial nerves
c. The first branch of the V pair of cranial nerves
*d. Sensory fibers of the third branch of the  V pair of cranial nerves
e. The second branch of the V pair of  cranial nerves
1333. A woman complains of painful chewing, especilly when she moves her lower jaw backwards. What muscles are affected?
*a. Posterior bundles of the temporal muscles
b. Anterior bundles of the temporal muscles
c. Medial pterygoid muscles
d. Masseter muscles
e. Lateral pterygoid muscles
1334. A woman complains of painful chewing, especilly when she moves her lower jaw backwards. What muscles are affected?
*a. Posterior bundles of the temporal muscles
b. Masseter muscles
c. Anterior bundles of the temporal muscles
d. Lateral pterygoid muscles
e. Medial pterygoid muscles
1335. A woman complains of painful chewing, especilly when she moves her lower jaw backwards. What muscles are affected?
a. Lateral pterygoid muscles
b. Anterior bundles of the temporal muscles
c. Masseter muscles
d. Medial pterygoid muscles
*e. Posterior bundles of the temporal muscles
1336. A woman diagnosed with dysentery was hospitalized into the infectious diseases unit. Laboratory analysis determined that the causative agents are Entamoeba histolytica. What drug should she be prescribed?
a. Benzylpenicillin sodium salt
*b. Metronidazole
c. Rifampicin
d. Isoniazid
e. Chingamin (Chloroquine)
1337. A woman diagnosed with dysentery was hospitalized into the infectious diseases unit. Laboratory analysis determined that the causative agents are Entamoeba histolytica. What drug should she be prescribed?
a. Chingamin (Chloroquine)
b. Benzylpenicillin sodium salt
c. Isoniazid
d. Rifampicin
*e. Metronidazole
1338. A woman diagnosed with dysentery was hospitalized into the infectious diseases unit. Laboratory analysis determined that the causative agents are Entamoeba histolytica. What drug should she be prescribed?
a. Chingamin (Chloroquine)
b. Isoniazid
c. Benzylpenicillin sodium salt
d. Rifampicin
*e. Metronidazole
1339. A woman gave birth to a child with toxoplasmosis. The woman thinks that she contracted toxoplasma from her friend, who recently gave birth to a child with the same disease. A human \textbfCANNOT be infected with toxoplasma through the following route:
a. Contact with a cat
b. Drinking water, contaminated with oocytes
*c. Contact with a sick person
d. Eating unwashed vegetables
e. Eating undercooked meat of an infected domesticated animal
1340. A woman gave birth to a child with toxoplasmosis. The woman thinks that she contracted toxoplasma from her friend, who recently gave birth to a child with the same disease. A human \textbfCANNOT be infected with toxoplasma through the following route:
a. Drinking water, contaminated with oocytes
b. Contact with a cat
*c. Contact with a sick person
d. Eating undercooked meat of an infected domesticated animal
e. Eating unwashed vegetables
1341. A woman gave birth to a child with toxoplasmosis. The woman thinks that she contracted toxoplasma from her friend, who recently gave birth to a child with the same disease. A human \textbfCANNOT be infected with toxoplasma through the following route:
a. Eating undercooked meat of an infected domesticated animal
b. Contact with a cat
c. Drinking water, contaminated with oocytes
*d. Contact with a sick person
e. Eating unwashed vegetables
1342. A woman had a formation with a fibrous capsule at the tip of her tooth. The formation was surgically removed. Microscopy shows that the formation consists of fibroblasts, macrophages, a small number of lymphocytes, plasma and xanthoma cells, cholesterol crystals, isolated cells of foreign bodies, as well as bands of stratified epithelium. Name this formation.
a. Complex granuloma
b. Radicular cyst of the jaw
*c. Simple granuloma
d. Follicular cyst of the jaw
e. Cystogranuloma
1343. A woman had a formation with a fibrous capsule at the tip of her tooth. The formation was surgically removed. Microscopy shows that the formation consists of fibroblasts, macrophages, a small number of lymphocytes, plasma and xanthoma cells, cholesterol crystals, isolated cells of foreign bodies, as well as bands of stratified epithelium. Name this formation.
a. Follicular cyst of the jaw
*b. Simple granuloma
c. Radicular cyst of the jaw
d. Complex granuloma
e. Cystogranuloma
1344. A woman had been taking synthetic hormones during her pregnancy. Her newborn girl presents with excessive hairiness which has formal resemblance to adrenogenital syndrome. This sign of variability is called:
a. Recombination
*b. Phenocopy
c. Replication
d. Mutation
e. Heterosis
1345. A woman had been taking synthetic hormones during her pregnancy. Her newborn girl presents with excessive hairiness which has formal resemblance to adrenogenital syndrome. This sign of variability is called:
a. Replication
b. Mutation
*c. Phenocopy
d. Recombination
e. Heterosis
1346. A woman had been taking synthetic hormones during her pregnancy. Her newborn girl presents with excessive hairiness which has formal resemblance to adrenogenital syndrome. This sign of variability is called:
a. Replication
b. Mutation
c. Recombination
*d. Phenocopy
e. Heterosis
1347. A woman has been hospitalized with complaints of dry mouth, thirst, and weight loss. Examination detected glucosuria. Her blood glucose level is 8.7 mmol/L. What pathological condition can be characterized by these symptoms?
a. Diabetes insipidus
b. Alimentary glucosuria
c. Steroid-induced diabetes
*d. Diabetes mellitus
e. Renal diabetes
1348. A woman has been hospitalized with complaints of dry mouth, thirst, and weight loss. Examination detected glucosuria. Her blood glucose level is 8.7 mmol/L. What pathological condition can be characterized by these symptoms?
a. Renal diabetes
b. Steroid-induced diabetes
c. Alimentary glucosuria
d. Diabetes insipidus
*e. Diabetes mellitus
1349. A woman has been hospitalized with complaints of dry mouth, thirst, and weight loss. Examination detected glucosuria. Her blood glucose level is 8.7 mmol/L. What pathological condition can be characterized by these symptoms?
a. Steroid-induced diabetes
*b. Diabetes mellitus
c. Alimentary glucosuria
d. Diabetes insipidus
e. Renal diabetes
1350. A woman has undergone a surgery for femoral hernia. In this case the hernial protrusion is projected into the:
*a. Femoral triangle
b. Inguinal region
c. Pubic region
d. -
e. Gluteal region
1351. A woman has undergone a surgery for femoral hernia. In this case the hernial protrusion is projected into the:
a. Gluteal region
*b. Femoral triangle
c. Inguinal region
d. Pubic region
e. -
1352. A woman has undergone a surgery for femoral hernia. In this case the hernial protrusion is projected into the:
a. Pubic region
b. Gluteal region
c. -
*d. Femoral triangle
e. Inguinal region
1353. A woman is diagnosed with Turner's syndrome (karyotype 45, X0). How many autosomal pairs would her somatic cells contain?
a. 24
b. 45
*c. 22
d. 23
e. 44
1354. A woman is diagnosed with Turner's syndrome (karyotype 45, X0). How many autosomal pairs would her somatic cells contain?
a. 44
b. 23
*c. 22
d. 45
e. 24
1355. A woman is diagnosed with Turner's syndrome (karyotype 45, X0). How many autosomal pairs would her somatic cells contain?
a. 44
b. 45
c. 23
d. 24
*e. 22
1356. A woman is diagnosed with a hemorrage into the posterior horns of the spinal cord. What is their function?
*a. Sensory
b. Parasympathetic
c. -
d. Motor
e. Sympathetic
1357. A woman is diagnosed with a hemorrage into the posterior horns of the spinal cord. What is their function?
*a. Sensory
b. Parasympathetic
c. Sympathetic
d. -
e. Motor
1358. A woman is diagnosed with a hemorrage into the posterior horns of the spinal cord. What is their function?
a. Sympathetic
b. Parasympathetic
*c. Sensory
d. -
e. Motor
1359. A woman presents with edemas. In her urine there is a large amount of protein excreted. What nephron segment is functionally disturbed in this case?
a. Ascending limb of loop of Henle
b. Distal convoluted tubule
c. Proximal convoluted tubule
*d. Renal corpuscle
e. Descending limb of loop of Henle
1360. A woman presents with edemas. In her urine there is a large amount of protein excreted. What nephron segment is functionally disturbed in this case?
a. Descending limb of loop of Henle
b. Proximal convoluted tubule
*c. Renal corpuscle
d. Ascending limb of loop of Henle
e. Distal convoluted tubule
1361. A woman presents with edemas. In her urine there is a large amount of protein excreted. What nephron segment is functionally disturbed in this case?
a. Distal convoluted tubule
b. Ascending limb of loop of Henle
*c. Renal corpuscle
d. Proximal convoluted tubule
e. Descending limb of loop of Henle
1362. A woman underwent surgical removal of a mandibular tumor that had the appearance of a detached dense node. The section revealed a red tumor with white spots and small cysts. Histology shows that the tumor consists of giant multinucleated and small mononucleated cells, between which bone trabeculae are formed. What tumor can be characterized by such clinical and laboratory findings?
*a. Giant cell tumor of bone
b. Ameloblastoma
c. Osteoid osteoma
d. Osteosarcoma
e. Osteoma
1363. A woman underwent surgical removal of a mandibular tumor that had the appearance of a detached dense node. The section revealed a red tumor with white spots and small cysts. Histology shows that the tumor consists of giant multinucleated and small mononucleated cells, between which bone trabeculae are formed. What tumor can be characterized by such clinical and laboratory findings?
a. Ameloblastoma
*b. Giant cell tumor of bone
c. Osteoid osteoma
d. Osteosarcoma
e. Osteoma
1364. A woman underwent surgical removal of a mandibular tumor that had the appearance of a detached dense node. The section revealed a red tumor with white spots and small cysts. Histology shows that the tumor consists of giant multinucleated and small mononucleated cells, between which bone trabeculae are formed. What tumor can be characterized by such clinical and laboratory findings?
a. Osteoid osteoma
*b. Giant cell tumor of bone
c. Osteosarcoma
d. Ameloblastoma
e. Osteoma
1365. A woman was diagnosed with peptic ulcer of the stomach. She has a long history of rheumatoid arthritis. What drugs are the likely cause of this disease in the patient?
a. Antihistamines
b. Antihypertensive drugs
c. H2 blockers
d. Antibiotics
*e. Glucocorticoids
1366. A woman was diagnosed with peptic ulcer of the stomach. She has a long history of rheumatoid arthritis. What drugs are the likely cause of this disease in the patient?
a. Antihypertensive drugs
b. Antihistamines
*c. Glucocorticoids
d. Antibiotics
e. H2 blockers
1367. A woman was diagnosed with peptic ulcer of the stomach. She has a long history of rheumatoid arthritis. What drugs are the likely cause of this disease in the patient?
a. H2 blockers
b. Antihypertensive drugs
c. Antihistamines
*d. Glucocorticoids
e. Antibiotics
1368. A woman was diagnosed with purulent stomatitis. What complete blood count finding is characteristic of this disease?
a. Anemia
b. Monocytosis
*c. Leukocytosis
d. Thrombocytosis
e. Lymphocytosis
1369. A woman was diagnosed with purulent stomatitis. What complete blood count finding is characteristic of this disease?
a. Monocytosis
b. Anemia
c. Thrombocytosis
*d. Leukocytosis
e. Lymphocytosis
1370. A woman was diagnosed with purulent stomatitis. What complete blood count finding is characteristic of this disease?
a. Thrombocytosis
b. Monocytosis
c. Lymphocytosis
d. Anemia
*e. Leukocytosis
1371. A woman with a deep wound on her leg was brought into the trauma department. She received the injury three days ago. What drug must be used to prevent tetanus in this case?
*a. Antitetanic serum
b. BCG vaccine
c. Diphtheria and tetanus toxoids
d. DPT vaccine
e. Antibiotics
1372. A woman with a deep wound on her leg was brought into the trauma department. She received the injury three days ago. What drug must be used to prevent tetanus in this case?
a. Antibiotics
b. BCG vaccine
*c. Antitetanic serum
d. Diphtheria and tetanus toxoids
e. DPT vaccine
1373. A woman with a deep wound on her leg was brought into the trauma department. She received the injury three days ago. What drug must be used to prevent tetanus in this case?
a. Antibiotics
b. Diphtheria and tetanus toxoids
*c. Antitetanic serum
d. BCG vaccine
e. DPT vaccine
1374. A woman with allergic dermatitis has been taking an antiallergic drug for a week. As the result of taking this drug, she developed marked somnolence. Name this drug:A) Dimedrol (Diphenhydramine)
*a. Loratadine
b. Aminazine (Chlorpromazine)
c. Adrenaline hydrochloride
d. Cromolyn sodium (Cromoglicic acid)
1375. A woman with allergic dermatitis has been taking an antiallergic drug for a week. As the result of taking this drug, she developed marked somnolence. Name this drug:A) Dimedrol (Diphenhydramine)
a. Aminazine (Chlorpromazine)
*b. Loratadine
c. Adrenaline hydrochloride
d. Cromolyn sodium (Cromoglicic acid)
1376. A woman with allergic dermatitis has been taking an antiallergic drug for a week. As the result of taking this drug, she developed marked somnolence. Name this drug:A) Dimedrol (Diphenhydramine)
a. Aminazine (Chlorpromazine)
*b. Loratadine
c. Cromolyn sodium (Cromoglicic acid)
d. Adrenaline hydrochloride
1377. A woman with the height of 1.70 m and the body weight of 94 kg presents with decreased carbohydrate tolerance. What hormone is likely to be deficient in this case, causing this condition?
a. Adrenaline
b. Glucagon
c. Cortisol
d. Somatotropin
*e. Insulin
1378. A woman with the height of 1.70 m and the body weight of 94 kg presents with decreased carbohydrate tolerance. What hormone is likely to be deficient in this case, causing this condition?
a. Cortisol
*b. Insulin
c. Adrenaline
d. Somatotropin
e. Glucagon
1379. A woman with the height of 1.70 m and the body weight of 94 kg presents with decreased carbohydrate tolerance. What hormone is likely to be deficient in this case, causing this condition?
a. Glucagon
b. Adrenaline
c. Cortisol
*d. Insulin
e. Somatotropin
1380. A worker of a cattle farm is brought to the surgeon with fever up to 40^oC, headache, weakness. Objective examination of his back revealed hyperemia and a dark red infiltration up to 5 cm in diameter with black bottom in its center, which was surrounded with pustules. What disease are these presentations typical of?
a. Abscess
*b. Anthrax
c. Tularemia
d. Furuncle
e. Plague
1381. A worker of a cattle farm is brought to the surgeon with fever up to 40^oC, headache, weakness. Objective examination of his back revealed hyperemia and a dark red infiltration up to 5 cm in diameter with black bottom in its center, which was surrounded with pustules. What disease are these presentations typical of?
a. Furuncle
*b. Anthrax
c. Abscess
d. Tularemia
e. Plague
1382. A worker of a cattle farm is brought to the surgeon with fever up to 40^oC, headache, weakness. Objective examination of his back revealed hyperemia and a dark red infiltration up to 5 cm in diameter with black bottom in its center, which was surrounded with pustules. What disease are these presentations typical of?
a. Plague
b. Tularemia
*c. Anthrax
d. Furuncle
e. Abscess
1383. Accelerated synthesis of a certain polysaccharide precedes the deposition of mineral salts into the organic matrix of the tooth. Name this polysaccharide:
*a. Chondroitin sulfate
b. Glycogen
c. Keratan sulfate
d. Dermatan sulfate
e. Heparin
1384. Accelerated synthesis of a certain polysaccharide precedes the deposition of mineral salts into the organic matrix of the tooth. Name this polysaccharide:
a. Dermatan sulfate
b. Heparin
c. Glycogen
d. Keratan sulfate
*e. Chondroitin sulfate
1385. Accelerated synthesis of a certain polysaccharide precedes the deposition of mineral salts into the organic matrix of the tooth. Name this polysaccharide:
a. Glycogen
b. Dermatan sulfate
c. Keratan sulfate
*d. Chondroitin sulfate
e. Heparin
1386. According to the data collected by WHO researchers, every year there are approximately 250 millon malaria cases occur in the world. This disease can be encountered predominantly in tropical and subtropical areas. The spread of this disease matches the natural habitat of the following genus of mosquitoes:
*a. Anopheles
b. Culiseta
c. Aedes
d. Culex
e. Mansonia
1387. According to the data collected by WHO researchers, every year there are approximately 250 millon malaria cases occur in the world. This disease can be encountered predominantly in tropical and subtropical areas. The spread of this disease matches the natural habitat of the following genus of mosquitoes:
a. Aedes
*b. Anopheles
c. Culiseta
d. Culex
e. Mansonia
1388. According to the data collected by WHO researchers, every year there are approximately 250 millon malaria cases occur in the world. This disease can be encountered predominantly in tropical and subtropical areas. The spread of this disease matches the natural habitat of the following genus of mosquitoes:
a. Culiseta
*b. Anopheles
c. Mansonia
d. Aedes
e. Culex
1389. According to the law of constancy of chromosome numbers, most animal species have definite and constant chromosome number. The mechanism that maintains this constancy during sexual reproduction of organisms is called:
*a. Meiosis
b. -
c. Regeneration
d. Amitosis
e. Schizogony
1390. According to the law of constancy of chromosome numbers, most animal species have definite and constant chromosome number. The mechanism that maintains this constancy during sexual reproduction of organisms is called:
a. Schizogony
*b. Meiosis
c. -
d. Amitosis
e. Regeneration
1391. According to the law of constancy of chromosome numbers, most animal species have definite and constant chromosome number. The mechanism that maintains this constancy during sexual reproduction of organisms is called:
a. Schizogony
*b. Meiosis
c. -
d. Regeneration
e. Amitosis
1392. Acetylsalicylic acid was prescribed to reduce the fever caused by an acute respiratory viral infection. What type of therapy is it?
a. Etiotropic therapy
*b. Symptomatic therapy
c. Preventive therapy
d. Replacement therapy
e. Stimulating therapy
1393. Acetylsalicylic acid was prescribed to reduce the fever caused by an acute respiratory viral infection. What type of therapy is it?
a. Stimulating therapy
b. Etiotropic therapy
*c. Symptomatic therapy
d. Preventive therapy
e. Replacement therapy
1394. Acetylsalicylic acid was prescribed to reduce the fever caused by an acute respiratory viral infection. What type of therapy is it?
a. Stimulating therapy
b. Preventive therapy
*c. Symptomatic therapy
d. Etiotropic therapy
e. Replacement therapy
1395. Acid resistance of human teeth depends on the ratio of calcium to phosphorus in the enamel. What is the normal calcium to phosphorus ratio?
*a. 1.67
b. 0.8
c. 0.9
d. 1.1
e. 0.5
1396. Acid resistance of human teeth depends on the ratio of calcium to phosphorus in the enamel. What is the normal calcium to phosphorus ratio?
a. 0.8
b. 1.1
*c. 1.67
d. 0.9
e. 0.5
1397. Acid resistance of human teeth depends on the ratio of calcium to phosphorus in the enamel. What is the normal calcium to phosphorus ratio?
a. 0.8
b. 1.1
c. 0.5
*d. 1.67
e. 0.9
1398. After a brain trauma, a person developed impaired perception of visual information. What cortical region was damaged?
*a. Occipital region of the cerebral cortex
b. Parietal region of the cerebral cortex
c. Precentral gyrus
d. Postcentral gyrus
e. Temporal region of the cerebral cortex
1399. After a brain trauma, a person developed impaired perception of visual information. What cortical region was damaged?
a. Parietal region of the cerebral cortex
b. Temporal region of the cerebral cortex
c. Precentral gyrus
*d. Occipital region of the cerebral cortex
e. Postcentral gyrus
1400. After a brain trauma, a person developed impaired perception of visual information. What cortical region was damaged?
a. Postcentral gyrus
b. Precentral gyrus
*c. Occipital region of the cerebral cortex
d. Parietal region of the cerebral cortex
e. Temporal region of the cerebral cortex
1401. After a cerebral hemorrhage, the patient developed a significant loss of gustatory sensitivity. What cerebral structure is likely to be damaged in this case?
a. Hippocampus
b. Substantia nigra
c. Hypothalamus
d. Amygdala
*e. Postcentral gyrus
1402. After a cerebral hemorrhage, the patient developed a significant loss of gustatory sensitivity. What cerebral structure is likely to be damaged in this case?
a. Hypothalamus
*b. Postcentral gyrus
c. Substantia nigra
d. Amygdala
e. Hippocampus
1403. After a cerebral hemorrhage, the patient developed a significant loss of gustatory sensitivity. What cerebral structure is likely to be damaged in this case?
a. Substantia nigra
b. Hippocampus
c. Amygdala
d. Hypothalamus
*e. Postcentral gyrus
1404. After a cerebrocranial trauma during wich the cerebellar region was damaged, the patient's movements became temporally and spatially discoordinated. What pathology developed in the patient?
*a. Ataxia
b. -
c. Astasia
d. Abasia
e. Paresis
1405. After a cerebrocranial trauma during wich the cerebellar region was damaged, the patient's movements became temporally and spatially discoordinated. What pathology developed in the patient?
a. Abasia
b. -
*c. Ataxia
d. Astasia
e. Paresis
1406. After a cerebrocranial trauma during wich the cerebellar region was damaged, the patient's movements became temporally and spatially discoordinated. What pathology developed in the patient?
a. Astasia
b. Abasia
*c. Ataxia
d. Paresis
e. -
1407. After a cold the patient developed impaired perception of pain and thermal stimuli in the front 2/3 of the tongue. What nerve was damaged in this case?
*a. Trigeminal
b. Phrenic
c. Chorda tympani
d. Vagus
e. Hypoglossal
1408. After a cold the patient developed impaired perception of pain and thermal stimuli in the front 2/3 of the tongue. What nerve was damaged in this case?
a. Phrenic
b. Chorda tympani
*c. Trigeminal
d. Vagus
e. Hypoglossal
1409. After a cold the patient developed impaired perception of pain and thermal stimuli in the front 2/3 of the tongue. What nerve was damaged in this case?
a. Vagus
*b. Trigeminal
c. Phrenic
d. Hypoglossal
e. Chorda tympani
1410. After a collision of two cars, one of the drivers presents with a deformity in the middle third of the left shin. The driver feels extreme pain that exacerbates on attempts to move it. The ends of a broken bone protrude from the open wound, the bone is triangular on section, movements cause the bleeding to intensify. What bone was damaged?
a. Femur
b. Fibula
*c. Tibia
d. Patella
e. Talus
1411. After a collision of two cars, one of the drivers presents with a deformity in the middle third of the left shin. The driver feels extreme pain that exacerbates on attempts to move it. The ends of a broken bone protrude from the open wound, the bone is triangular on section, movements cause the bleeding to intensify. What bone was damaged?
a. Talus
b. Femur
c. Patella
d. Fibula
*e. Tibia
1412. After a collision of two cars, one of the drivers presents with a deformity in the middle third of the left shin. The driver feels extreme pain that exacerbates on attempts to move it. The ends of a broken bone protrude from the open wound, the bone is triangular on section, movements cause the bleeding to intensify. What bone was damaged?
a. Talus
b. Fibula
*c. Tibia
d. Femur
e. Patella
1413. After a craniocerebral injury, a 45-year-old woman was diagnosed with superior orbital fissure syndrome (RochonDuvigneaud syndrome). It is a complex of symptoms resulting from damage to certain pairs of cranial nerves that pass through the fissure of the same name. What pairs of nerves are affected in this case?
*a. N. oculomotorius, n. trochlearis, n. abducens, r. ophthalmicus n. trigemini
b. N. olfactorius, n. opticus
c. N. vagus, n. accessorius, n. hypoglossus
d. N. vestibulocochlearis, n. glossopharyngeus
e. N. facialis, n. trochlearis, n. abducens
1414. After a craniocerebral injury, a 45-year-old woman was diagnosed with superior orbital fissure syndrome (RochonDuvigneaud syndrome). It is a complex of symptoms resulting from damage to certain pairs of cranial nerves that pass through the fissure of the same name. What pairs of nerves are affected in this case?
a. N. vagus, n. accessorius, n. hypoglossus
b. N. vestibulocochlearis, n. glossopharyngeus
*c. N. oculomotorius, n. trochlearis, n. abducens, r. ophthalmicus n. trigemini
d. N. olfactorius, n. opticus
e. N. facialis, n. trochlearis, n. abducens
1415. After a craniocerebral injury, a 45-year-old woman was diagnosed with superior orbital fissure syndrome (RochonDuvigneaud syndrome). It is a complex of symptoms resulting from damage to certain pairs of cranial nerves that pass through the fissure of the same name. What pairs of nerves are affected in this case?
a. N. vestibulocochlearis, n. glossopharyngeus
b. N. facialis, n. trochlearis, n. abducens
c. N. vagus, n. accessorius, n. hypoglossus
*d. N. oculomotorius, n. trochlearis, n. abducens, r. ophthalmicus n. trigemini
e. N. olfactorius, n. opticus
1416. After a family quarrel, a 70-year-old man was hospitalized with the diagnosis of ischemic heart disease, preinfarction state. What substance can cause a coronary angiospasm in the patient?
*a. Thromboxane A2
b. Adenosine
c. Potassium ions
d. Prostacyclin
e. Nitrous oxide
1417. After a family quarrel, a 70-year-old man was hospitalized with the diagnosis of ischemic heart disease, preinfarction state. What substance can cause a coronary angiospasm in the patient?
*a. Thromboxane A2
b. Prostacyclin
c. Adenosine
d. Potassium ions
e. Nitrous oxide
1418. After a family quarrel, a 70-year-old man was hospitalized with the diagnosis of ischemic heart disease, preinfarction state. What substance can cause a coronary angiospasm in the patient?
a. Nitrous oxide
b. Adenosine
*c. Thromboxane A2
d. Potassium ions
e. Prostacyclin
1419. After a glucose-lowering therapy, a patient with diabetes mellitus developed hypoglycemia. What hormone, taken in excess, could have caused this hypoglycemic condition?
*a. Insulin
b. Adrenaline
c. Glucagon
d. Thyroxine
e. Cortisol
1420. After a glucose-lowering therapy, a patient with diabetes mellitus developed hypoglycemia. What hormone, taken in excess, could have caused this hypoglycemic condition?
a. Cortisol
b. Thyroxine
*c. Insulin
d. Adrenaline
e. Glucagon
1421. After a glucose-lowering therapy, a patient with diabetes mellitus developed hypoglycemia. What hormone, taken in excess, could have caused this hypoglycemic condition?
a. Glucagon
b. Thyroxine
c. Adrenaline
d. Cortisol
*e. Insulin
1422. After a mechanical injury a tourniquet was applied to the patient's arm to stop the bleeding. Below the tourniquet the arm became pale and numb. This condition is caused by:
*a. Compression ischemia
b. Venous congestion
c. Thrombosis
d. Obstruction ischemia
e. Angiospastic ischemia
1423. After a mechanical injury a tourniquet was applied to the patient's arm to stop the bleeding. Below the tourniquet the arm became pale and numb. This condition is caused by:
a. Angiospastic ischemia
*b. Compression ischemia
c. Obstruction ischemia
d. Thrombosis
e. Venous congestion
1424. After a mechanical injury a tourniquet was applied to the patient's arm to stop the bleeding. Below the tourniquet the arm became pale and numb. This condition is caused by:
a. Obstruction ischemia
b. Thrombosis
c. Venous congestion
*d. Compression ischemia
e. Angiospastic ischemia
1425. After a nose trauna, a boxer developed an impaired sense of smell. What cells can cause a loss of smell, when damaged?
*a. Neurosensory epithelial cells
b. Supporting epithelial cells
c. Basement epithelial cells
d. Microvillous epithelial cells
e. Ciliary epithelial cells
1426. After a nose trauna, a boxer developed an impaired sense of smell. What cells can cause a loss of smell, when damaged?
a. Basement epithelial cells
b. Supporting epithelial cells
*c. Neurosensory epithelial cells
d. Ciliary epithelial cells
e. Microvillous epithelial cells
1427. After a nose trauna, a boxer developed an impaired sense of smell. What cells can cause a loss of smell, when damaged?
a. Supporting epithelial cells
*b. Neurosensory epithelial cells
c. Microvillous epithelial cells
d. Basement epithelial cells
e. Ciliary epithelial cells
1428. After a prolonged isoniazid treatment, the patient developed polyneuritis, paresthesia, memory disorders, and convulsions. What is the likely mechanism of the described isoniazid side-effects?
a. Disruption of cell membrane synthesis
b. Para-aminobenzoic acid antagonism
c. Inhibition of RNA synthesis
d. Inhibition of protein synthesis
*e. Inhibition of pyridoxal phosphate formation
1429. After a prolonged isoniazid treatment, the patient developed polyneuritis, paresthesia, memory disorders, and convulsions. What is the likely mechanism of the described isoniazid side-effects?
a. Inhibition of RNA synthesis
b. Disruption of cell membrane synthesis
*c. Inhibition of pyridoxal phosphate formation
d. Inhibition of protein synthesis
e. Para-aminobenzoic acid antagonism
1430. After a prolonged isoniazid treatment, the patient developed polyneuritis, paresthesia, memory disorders, and convulsions. What is the likely mechanism of the described isoniazid side-effects?
a. Inhibition of RNA synthesis
b. Disruption of cell membrane synthesis
c. Inhibition of protein synthesis
d. Para-aminobenzoic acid antagonism
*e. Inhibition of pyridoxal phosphate formation
1431. After a psychological trauma, the patient constantly feels agitation, anxiety, and fear. What drug that is a benzodiazepine derivative was prescribed to this patient?
*a. Diazepam
b. Bisacodyl
c. Analgin (Metamizole)
d. Heparin
e. Metoclopramide
1432. After a psychological trauma, the patient constantly feels agitation, anxiety, and fear. What drug that is a benzodiazepine derivative was prescribed to this patient?
a. Heparin
b. Analgin (Metamizole)
*c. Diazepam
d. Bisacodyl
e. Metoclopramide
1433. After a psychological trauma, the patient constantly feels agitation, anxiety, and fear. What drug that is a benzodiazepine derivative was prescribed to this patient?
a. Metoclopramide
b. Heparin
c. Bisacodyl
d. Analgin (Metamizole)
*e. Diazepam
1434. After a ride in a car, with a side window open, the driver developed facial asymmetry because of one-sided paralysis of mimic muscles. The left eye cannot be fully closed. What cranial nerve is damaged?
*a. N. facialis
b. N. accessorius
c. N. olfactorius
d. N. vagus
e. N. hypoglossus
1435. After a ride in a car, with a side window open, the driver developed facial asymmetry because of one-sided paralysis of mimic muscles. The left eye cannot be fully closed. What cranial nerve is damaged?
a. N. accessorius
b. N. vagus
c. N. hypoglossus
*d. N. facialis
e. N. olfactorius
1436. After a ride in a car, with a side window open, the driver developed facial asymmetry because of one-sided paralysis of mimic muscles. The left eye cannot be fully closed. What cranial nerve is damaged?
a. N. vagus
b. N. accessorius
*c. N. facialis
d. N. hypoglossus
e. N. olfactorius
1437. After a surgery an animal developed tetany as a result of low plasma calcium levels. What endocrine gland was removed in the animal?
a. Thymus
*b. Parathyroid glands
c. Pineal gland
d. Adrenal cortex
e. Thyroid gland
1438. After a surgery an animal developed tetany as a result of low plasma calcium levels. What endocrine gland was removed in the animal?
a. Thymus
b. Thyroid gland
*c. Parathyroid glands
d. Pineal gland
e. Adrenal cortex
1439. After a surgery an animal developed tetany as a result of low plasma calcium levels. What endocrine gland was removed in the animal?
a. Thyroid gland
b. Pineal gland
c. Thymus
*d. Parathyroid glands
e. Adrenal cortex
1440. After a tooth extraction, the patient developed acute heart failure. What drug should be prescribed in this case?
a. Convallaria majalis tincture
*b. Strophanthin
c. Digitoxin
d. rdigitum
e. Adonisid
1441. After a tooth extraction, the patient developed acute heart failure. What drug should be prescribed in this case?
a. Digitoxin
b. Convallaria majalis tincture
c. rdigitum
d. Adonisid
*e. Strophanthin
1442. After a tooth extraction, the patient developed bleeding. Blood test revealed a decrease in the prothrombin index. What vitamin deficiency can be the cause of this condition?
a. 
*b. 
c. 
d. 
e. D
1443. After a tooth extraction, the patient developed bleeding. Blood test revealed a decrease in the prothrombin index. What vitamin deficiency can be the cause of this condition?
a. 
b. 
*c. 
d. 
e. D
1444. After a tooth extraction, the patient developed bleeding. Blood test revealed a decrease in the prothrombin index. What vitamin deficiency can be the cause of this condition?
a. 
*b. 
c. 
d. D
e. 
1445. After a total gastric resection the patient developed severe B12-deficient anemia with disturbed hematopoiesis. Changed erythrocytes appeared in the patient's blood. One of the signs of this anemia is the presence of the following in blood:
a. Anulocytes
b. Normocytes
c. Microcytes
*d. Megalocytes
e. Elliptocytes
1446. After a total gastric resection the patient developed severe B12-deficient anemia with disturbed hematopoiesis. Changed erythrocytes appeared in the patient's blood. One of the signs of this anemia is the presence of the following in blood:
a. Elliptocytes
b. Microcytes
c. Normocytes
*d. Megalocytes
e. Anulocytes
1447. After a total gastric resection the patient developed severe B12-deficient anemia with disturbed hematopoiesis. Changed erythrocytes appeared in the patient's blood. One of the signs of this anemia is the presence of the following in blood:
a. Microcytes
b. Anulocytes
*c. Megalocytes
d. Normocytes
e. Elliptocytes
1448. After a traffic accident a man presents with severe blood loss, consciousness disturbance, low blood pressure, as well as compensatory activation of the renin-angiotensin system, which results in:
a. Increased blood coagulation
b. Intensification of erythropoiesis
c. Intensification of heart contractions
*d. Hyperproduction of aldosterone
e. Hyperproduction of vasopressin
1449. After a traffic accident a man presents with severe blood loss, consciousness disturbance, low blood pressure, as well as compensatory activation of the renin-angiotensin system, which results in:
a. Intensification of erythropoiesis
b. Increased blood coagulation
c. Hyperproduction of vasopressin
d. Intensification of heart contractions
*e. Hyperproduction of aldosterone
1450. After a traffic accident a man presents with severe blood loss, consciousness disturbance, low blood pressure, as well as compensatory activation of the renin-angiotensin system, which results in:
a. Intensification of erythropoiesis
b. Intensification of heart contractions
c. Increased blood coagulation
d. Hyperproduction of vasopressin
*e. Hyperproduction of aldosterone
1451. After a trauma a man is unable to extend his arm in the elbow joint. It can be caused by disturbed function of the following muscle:
*a. Musculus triceps brachii
b. Musculus infraspinatus
c. Musculus subscapularis
d. Musculus levator scapule
e. Musculus teres major
1452. After a trauma a man is unable to extend his arm in the elbow joint. It can be caused by disturbed function of the following muscle:
a. Musculus infraspinatus
b. Musculus teres major
c. Musculus subscapularis
*d. Musculus triceps brachii
e. Musculus levator scapule
1453. After a trauma a man is unable to extend his arm in the elbow joint. It can be caused by disturbed function of the following muscle:
a. Musculus subscapularis
b. Musculus teres major
c. Musculus infraspinatus
*d. Musculus triceps brachii
e. Musculus levator scapule
1454. After a traumatic brain injury the patient developed a urinary system dysfunction - polyuria. What hormone secretion was disturbed, resulting in polyuria in this patient?
*a. Vasopressin
b. Adrenaline
c. Mineralocorticoids
d. ACTH
e. Insulin
1455. After a traumatic brain injury the patient developed a urinary system dysfunction - polyuria. What hormone secretion was disturbed, resulting in polyuria in this patient?
*a. Vasopressin
b. Mineralocorticoids
c. ACTH
d. Insulin
e. Adrenaline
1456. After a traumatic brain injury the patient developed a urinary system dysfunction - polyuria. What hormone secretion was disturbed, resulting in polyuria in this patient?
a. Adrenaline
b. Insulin
*c. Vasopressin
d. ACTH
e. Mineralocorticoids
1457. After acute blood loss, the patient with rhesus-negative blood was mistakenly transfused with rhesus-positive blood. What changes will occur in blood in this case?
a. Erythrocytosis
*b. Hemolysis of recipient's erythrocytes
c. Hemolysis of donor's erythrocytes
d. Platelet aggregation
e. Aggregation of donor's erythrocytes
1458. After acute blood loss, the patient with rhesus-negative blood was mistakenly transfused with rhesus-positive blood. What changes will occur in blood in this case?
a. Erythrocytosis
b. Platelet aggregation
*c. Hemolysis of recipient's erythrocytes
d. Aggregation of donor's erythrocytes
e. Hemolysis of donor's erythrocytes
1459. After acute blood loss, the patient with rhesus-negative blood was mistakenly transfused with rhesus-positive blood. What changes will occur in blood in this case?
a. Hemolysis of donor's erythrocytes
b. Aggregation of donor's erythrocytes
c. Platelet aggregation
d. Erythrocytosis
*e. Hemolysis of recipient's erythrocytes
1460. After administration of eyedrops, the patient developed mydriasis and paralysis of accommodation. What group of drugs can cause this effect?
*a. Muscarinic antagonists
b. Muscarinic agonists
c. Anticholinesterase drugs
d. alpha-adrenergic blockers
e. beta-adrenergic agonists
1461. After administration of eyedrops, the patient developed mydriasis and paralysis of accommodation. What group of drugs can cause this effect?
a. Anticholinesterase drugs
*b. Muscarinic antagonists
c. alpha-adrenergic blockers
d. beta-adrenergic agonists
e. Muscarinic agonists
1462. After administration of eyedrops, the patient developed mydriasis and paralysis of accommodation. What group of drugs can cause this effect?
a. Muscarinic agonists
*b. Muscarinic antagonists
c. Anticholinesterase drugs
d. alpha-adrenergic blockers
e. beta-adrenergic agonists
1463. After an exposure to radiation, the patient is recommended to include more vegetable oils in his diet as they are a source of polyene fatty acids. Name the acid that has three double bonds:
a. Oleic acid
b. Arachidonic acid
c. Stearic acid
d. Palmitic acid
*e. Linolenic acid
1464. After an exposure to radiation, the patient is recommended to include more vegetable oils in his diet as they are a source of polyene fatty acids. Name the acid that has three double bonds:
a. Palmitic acid
b. Oleic acid
c. Stearic acid
*d. Linolenic acid
e. Arachidonic acid
1465. After an exposure to radiation, the patient is recommended to include more vegetable oils in his diet as they are a source of polyene fatty acids. Name the acid that has three double bonds:
a. Palmitic acid
b. Stearic acid
c. Arachidonic acid
*d. Linolenic acid
e. Oleic acid
1466. After an insulin injection, a patient with diabetes mellitus developed unconsciousness and convulsions. What result will be shown by the biochemical test for blood sugar in this case?
*a. 1.5 mmol/L
b. 10.0 mmol/L
c. 3.3 mmol/L
d. 5.5 mmol/L
e. 8.0 mmol/L
1467. After an insulin injection, a patient with diabetes mellitus developed unconsciousness and convulsions. What result will be shown by the biochemical test for blood sugar in this case?
a. 3.3 mmol/L
b. 10.0 mmol/L
*c. 1.5 mmol/L
d. 5.5 mmol/L
e. 8.0 mmol/L
1468. After an insulin injection, a patient with diabetes mellitus developed unconsciousness and convulsions. What result will be shown by the biochemical test for blood sugar in this case?
a. 8.0 mmol/L
b. 10.0 mmol/L
c. 5.5 mmol/L
d. 3.3 mmol/L
*e. 1.5 mmol/L
1469. After entering the body, bacteria undergo phagocytosis by macrophages. What role do macrophages play in the cooperation of immunocompetent cells at the first stage of immune response formation?
a. They activate NK-cells
b. They produce immunoglobulins
*c. They process antigens and present them to T-helpers
d. They process antigens and present them to T-killers
e. They activate T-killers
1470. After entering the body, bacteria undergo phagocytosis by macrophages. What role do macrophages play in the cooperation of immunocompetent cells at the first stage of immune response formation?
a. They activate T-killers
b. They process antigens and present them to T-killers
*c. They process antigens and present them to T-helpers
d. They activate NK-cells
e. They produce immunoglobulins
1471. After entering the body, bacteria undergo phagocytosis by macrophages. What role do macrophages play in the cooperation of immunocompetent cells at the first stage of immune response formation?
a. They process antigens and present them to T-killers
b. They activate NK-cells
c. They activate T-killers
d. They produce immunoglobulins
*e. They process antigens and present them to T-helpers
1472. After examination of a 6-year-old girl with sore throat, the doctor suspected diphtheria. He obtained a swab from the child's tonsils. What microscopic presentation is characteristic of the causative agent of this disease?
a. -
*b. Gram-positive bacilli, arranged at an  angle to each other
c. Gram-positive cocci, arranged in chains
d. Gram-negative bacilli, arranged  chaotically
e. Gram-negative cocci, arranged in pairs
1473. After examination of a 6-year-old girl with sore throat, the doctor suspected diphtheria. He obtained a swab from the child's tonsils. What microscopic presentation is characteristic of the causative agent of this disease?
a. Gram-negative cocci, arranged in pairs
b. Gram-negative bacilli, arranged  chaotically
*c. Gram-positive bacilli, arranged at an  angle to each other
d. Gram-positive cocci, arranged in chains
e. -
1474. After examination of a 6-year-old girl with sore throat, the doctor suspected diphtheria. He obtained a swab from the child's tonsils. What microscopic presentation is characteristic of the causative agent of this disease?
a. Gram-positive cocci, arranged in chains
b. Gram-negative cocci, arranged in pairs
*c. Gram-positive bacilli, arranged at an  angle to each other
d. Gram-negative bacilli, arranged  chaotically
e. -
1475. After examination, the signs of acromegaly were detected in a patient. What endocrine gland is involved in this pathological process?
*a. Adenohypophysis
b. Pineal gland
c. Thyroid gland
d. Adrenal glands
e. Neurohypophysis
1476. After examination, the signs of acromegaly were detected in a patient. What endocrine gland is involved in this pathological process?
a. Pineal gland
*b. Adenohypophysis
c. Neurohypophysis
d. Thyroid gland
e. Adrenal glands
1477. After examination, the signs of acromegaly were detected in a patient. What endocrine gland is involved in this pathological process?
a. Thyroid gland
b. Neurohypophysis
c. Pineal gland
*d. Adenohypophysis
e. Adrenal glands
1478. After exposure to radiation, a rabbit presents with the III stage of acute radiation sickness that manifests in bone marrow syndrome. Damage to what tissue is the leading link in the pathogenesis of radiation sickness-related disorders in this case?
*a. Hematopoietic tissue
b. Nerve tissue
c. Bone tissue
d. Gonadal epithelium
e. Glandular epithelium
1479. After exposure to radiation, a rabbit presents with the III stage of acute radiation sickness that manifests in bone marrow syndrome. Damage to what tissue is the leading link in the pathogenesis of radiation sickness-related disorders in this case?
a. Gonadal epithelium
b. Glandular epithelium
c. Nerve tissue
d. Bone tissue
*e. Hematopoietic tissue
1480. After exposure to radiation, a rabbit presents with the III stage of acute radiation sickness that manifests in bone marrow syndrome. Damage to what tissue is the leading link in the pathogenesis of radiation sickness-related disorders in this case?
a. Nerve tissue
*b. Hematopoietic tissue
c. Glandular epithelium
d. Bone tissue
e. Gonadal epithelium
1481. After extraction of a tooth on the lower jaw, a 30-year-old woman developed an increase in temperature and later a swelling in her neck region. A dissection of the skin of her neck revealed that the subcutaneous fatty tissue was soaked through with a foul-smelling opaque yellow-green liquid. What process developed in the fatty tissue in this case?
a. Fibrinous inflammation
*b. Phlegmon
c. Abscess
d. Serous inflammation
e. Hemorrhagic inflammation
1482. After extraction of a tooth on the lower jaw, a 30-year-old woman developed an increase in temperature and later a swelling in her neck region. A dissection of the skin of her neck revealed that the subcutaneous fatty tissue was soaked through with a foul-smelling opaque yellow-green liquid. What process developed in the fatty tissue in this case?
a. Fibrinous inflammation
*b. Phlegmon
c. Serous inflammation
d. Abscess
e. Hemorrhagic inflammation
1483. After extraction of a tooth on the lower jaw, a 30-year-old woman developed an increase in temperature and later a swelling in her neck region. A dissection of the skin of her neck revealed that the subcutaneous fatty tissue was soaked through with a foul-smelling opaque yellow-green liquid. What process developed in the fatty tissue in this case?
a. Fibrinous inflammation
b. Hemorrhagic inflammation
c. Abscess
*d. Phlegmon
e. Serous inflammation
1484. After extraction of an upper premolar, the patient bleeds from the alveolar socket. What should be used to stop the bleeding in this case?
a. Neodicoumarin (Ethyl biscoumacetate)
b. Aminocaproic acid
c. Heparin
*d. Thrombin topically
e. Vicasol (Menadione)
1485. After extraction of an upper premolar, the patient bleeds from the alveolar socket. What should be used to stop the bleeding in this case?
a. Vicasol (Menadione)
b. Heparin
c. Neodicoumarin (Ethyl biscoumacetate)
*d. Thrombin topically
e. Aminocaproic acid
1486. After facial trauma the patient developed a buccal hematoma. What salivatory gland has its outflow blocked by the hematoma?
*a. Parotid
b. Sublingual
c. Lingual
d. Buccal
e. Submandibular
1487. After facial trauma the patient developed a buccal hematoma. What salivatory gland has its outflow blocked by the hematoma?
*a. Parotid
b. Sublingual
c. Submandibular
d. Buccal
e. Lingual
1488. After facial trauma the patient developed a buccal hematoma. What salivatory gland has its outflow blocked by the hematoma?
a. Buccal
b. Lingual
*c. Parotid
d. Sublingual
e. Submandibular
1489. After ineffective treatment of stomatitis with antibiotics, the patient consulted a dentist. The dentist made a diagnosis of herpetic stomatitis. What medicine should the patient be prescribed?
*a. Acyclovir
b. Metrogyl (Metronidazole)
c. Clotrimazole
d. Azithromycin
e. Sulfacyl sodium (Sulfacetamide)
1490. After ineffective treatment of stomatitis with antibiotics, the patient consulted a dentist. The dentist made a diagnosis of herpetic stomatitis. What medicine should the patient be prescribed?
a. Clotrimazole
b. Sulfacyl sodium (Sulfacetamide)
*c. Acyclovir
d. Metrogyl (Metronidazole)
e. Azithromycin
1491. After ineffective treatment of stomatitis with antibiotics, the patient consulted a dentist. The dentist made a diagnosis of herpetic stomatitis. What medicine should the patient be prescribed?
a. Metrogyl (Metronidazole)
b. Azithromycin
*c. Acyclovir
d. Sulfacyl sodium (Sulfacetamide)
e. Clotrimazole
1492. After inhalation of dust a person develops cough, which results from stimulation of:
*a. Irritant receptors
b. Pulmonary thermoreceptors
c. Pulmonary chemoreceptors
d. Juxtacapillary receptors
e. Nociceptors
1493. After inhalation of dust a person develops cough, which results from stimulation of:
a. Pulmonary chemoreceptors
b. Juxtacapillary receptors
*c. Irritant receptors
d. Pulmonary thermoreceptors
e. Nociceptors
1494. After inhalation of dust a person develops cough, which results from stimulation of:
a. Pulmonary thermoreceptors
b. Juxtacapillary receptors
*c. Irritant receptors
d. Pulmonary chemoreceptors
e. Nociceptors
1495. After introdiction of adrenaline the patient's blood glucose level increased. It is caused by intensified:
*a. Glycogenolysis in the liver
b. Glycolysis in the skeletal muscles
c. Glycogen synthesis
d. Glycogenolysis in the muscles
e. Glycolysis in the liver
1496. After introdiction of adrenaline the patient's blood glucose level increased. It is caused by intensified:
a. Glycogen synthesis
b. Glycolysis in the skeletal muscles
*c. Glycogenolysis in the liver
d. Glycogenolysis in the muscles
e. Glycolysis in the liver
1497. After introdiction of adrenaline the patient's blood glucose level increased. It is caused by intensified:
a. Glycogenolysis in the muscles
*b. Glycogenolysis in the liver
c. Glycolysis in the skeletal muscles
d. Glycolysis in the liver
e. Glycogen synthesis
1498. After mushroom poisoning, a person developed yellow coloring of the skin and sclera and dark-colored urine. What pigment causes urine discoloration in patients with hemolytic jaundice?
a. Bilirubin monoglucuronide
b. Unconjugated bilirubin
*c. Stercobilin
d. Verdoglobin
e. Biliverdin
1499. After mushroom poisoning, a person developed yellow coloring of the skin and sclera and dark-colored urine. What pigment causes urine discoloration in patients with hemolytic jaundice?
a. Biliverdin
b. Verdoglobin
c. Unconjugated bilirubin
d. Bilirubin monoglucuronide
*e. Stercobilin
1500. After mushroom poisoning, a person developed yellow coloring of the skin and sclera and dark-colored urine. What pigment causes urine discoloration in patients with hemolytic jaundice?
a. Unconjugated bilirubin
b. Verdoglobin
*c. Stercobilin
d. Biliverdin
e. Bilirubin monoglucuronide
1501. After spinal trauma the patient presents with absence of voluntary movements and tendon reflexes; sensitivity is retained only in the lower extremities. What is the mechanism of these disturbances and what part of the spine was injured?
*a. Spinal shock, thoracic spine
b. Spinal shock, cervical spine
c. Central paralysis, coccyx
d. Peripheral paralysis, cervical spine
e. -
1502. After spinal trauma the patient presents with absence of voluntary movements and tendon reflexes; sensitivity is retained only in the lower extremities. What is the mechanism of these disturbances and what part of the spine was injured?
a. Central paralysis, coccyx
b. Peripheral paralysis, cervical spine
*c. Spinal shock, thoracic spine
d. -
e. Spinal shock, cervical spine
1503. After spinal trauma the patient presents with absence of voluntary movements and tendon reflexes; sensitivity is retained only in the lower extremities. What is the mechanism of these disturbances and what part of the spine was injured?
a. Spinal shock, cervical spine
b. Peripheral paralysis, cervical spine
*c. Spinal shock, thoracic spine
d. Central paralysis, coccyx
e. -
1504. After the eruption of the permanent teeth, their dentin was involved into a pathological process. In the affected areas, the following can be detected: uneven mineralization, absent or distorted dentinal tubules, certain inclusions. How is this dentin called?
a. Predentin
b. Demineralized
*c. Tertiary
d. Primary
e. Secondary
1505. After the eruption of the permanent teeth, their dentin was involved into a pathological process. In the affected areas, the following can be detected: uneven mineralization, absent or distorted dentinal tubules, certain inclusions. How is this dentin called?
a. Primary
b. Predentin
c. Secondary
d. Demineralized
*e. Tertiary
1506. After the eruption of the permanent teeth, their dentin was involved into a pathological process. In the affected areas, the following can be detected: uneven mineralization, absent or distorted dentinal tubules, certain inclusions. How is this dentin called?
a. Secondary
b. Demineralized
c. Primary
*d. Tertiary
e. Predentin
1507. After the extraction of the second upper molar, the patient developed bleeding from the tooth socket. What vessel is damaged in this case, causing the bleeding?
*a. Aa. alveolares superiores posteriores
b. Aa. alveolares superiores anteriores
c. A) infraorbitalis
d. A) palatina descendens
e. A) alveolaris inferior
1508. After the extraction of the second upper molar, the patient developed bleeding from the tooth socket. What vessel is damaged in this case, causing the bleeding?
a. A) alveolaris inferior
*b. Aa. alveolares superiores posteriores
c. Aa. alveolares superiores anteriores
d. A) palatina descendens
e. A) infraorbitalis
1509. After the extraction of the second upper molar, the patient developed bleeding from the tooth socket. What vessel is damaged in this case, causing the bleeding?
a. A) infraorbitalis
*b. Aa. alveolares superiores posteriores
c. A) palatina descendens
d. A) alveolaris inferior
e. Aa. alveolares superiores anteriores
1510. After the extraction of upper tooth number 7, air appeared in the tooth socket. The wall of what paranasal sinus is most likely to be breached in this case?
*a. Maxillary sinus
b. Middle air cells of the ethmoid sinus
c. Sphenoid sinus
d. Frontal sinus
e. Posterior air cells of the ethmoid sinus
1511. After the extraction of upper tooth number 7, air appeared in the tooth socket. The wall of what paranasal sinus is most likely to be breached in this case?
*a. Maxillary sinus
b. Sphenoid sinus
c. Middle air cells of the ethmoid sinus
d. Posterior air cells of the ethmoid sinus
e. Frontal sinus
1512. After the extraction of upper tooth number 7, air appeared in the tooth socket. The wall of what paranasal sinus is most likely to be breached in this case?
a. Frontal sinus
b. Middle air cells of the ethmoid sinus
c. Sphenoid sinus
d. Posterior air cells of the ethmoid sinus
*e. Maxillary sinus
1513. After the tooth extraction, the patient was prescribed ibuprofen for pain relief. What enzyme does it inhibit?
*a. Cyclooxygenase
b. Phospholipase 2
c. Phospholipase C
d. Phosphodiesterase
e. Lipoxygenase
1514. After the tooth extraction, the patient was prescribed ibuprofen for pain relief. What enzyme does it inhibit?
a. Phospholipase C
b. Lipoxygenase
c. Phosphodiesterase
*d. Cyclooxygenase
e. Phospholipase 2
1515. After the tooth extraction, the patient was prescribed ibuprofen for pain relief. What enzyme does it inhibit?
a. Phospholipase 2
b. Lipoxygenase
c. Phosphodiesterase
d. Phospholipase C
*e. Cyclooxygenase
1516. After the water supply system had been put into operation in a new residential area, the medical officers of sanitary and epidemiological station measured total microbial number in the water. Name the maximum permissible value of this indicator for potable water:
a. 10
b. 400
c. 500
d. 1000
*e. 100
1517. After the water supply system had been put into operation in a new residential area, the medical officers of sanitary and epidemiological station measured total microbial number in the water. Name the maximum permissible value of this indicator for potable water:
a. 10
b. 500
*c. 100
d. 400
e. 1000
1518. After the water supply system had been put into operation in a new residential area, the medical officers of sanitary and epidemiological station measured total microbial number in the water. Name the maximum permissible value of this indicator for potable water:
a. 400
b. 1000
c. 500
d. 10
*e. 100
1519. Alkaline phosphatase catalyzes the reactions of phosphorus-ether bonds hydrolysis with release of phosphate ions that play an important role in the formation of bone mineral matrix. What factors ensure the course of such reactions?
a. Fe^3+, =5.0-5.5
b. Fe^3+, =7.0-7.4
c. Fe^2+, =7.0-7.4
d. Zn^2+, =5.0-5.5
*e. Zn^2+, =7.0-7.4
1520. Alkaline phosphatase catalyzes the reactions of phosphorus-ether bonds hydrolysis with release of phosphate ions that play an important role in the formation of bone mineral matrix. What factors ensure the course of such reactions?
a. Fe^3+, =7.0-7.4
b. Fe^2+, =7.0-7.4
*c. Zn^2+, =7.0-7.4
d. Fe^3+, =5.0-5.5
e. Zn^2+, =5.0-5.5
1521. Alkaline phosphatase catalyzes the reactions of phosphorus-ether bonds hydrolysis with release of phosphate ions that play an important role in the formation of bone mineral matrix. What factors ensure the course of such reactions?
a. Zn^2+, =5.0-5.5
b. Fe^3+, =5.0-5.5
c. Fe^2+, =7.0-7.4
d. Fe^3+, =7.0-7.4
*e. Zn^2+, =7.0-7.4
1522. Alkaline phosphatase is an important enzyme contained in saliva. It belongs to the following class of enzymes:
*a. Hydrolases
b. Lyases
c. Ligases
d. Oxidoreductases
e. Transferases
1523. Alkaline phosphatase is an important enzyme contained in saliva. It belongs to the following class of enzymes:
*a. Hydrolases
b. Lyases
c. Transferases
d. Oxidoreductases
e. Ligases
1524. Alkaline phosphatase is an important enzyme contained in saliva. It belongs to the following class of enzymes:
a. Oxidoreductases
b. Transferases
c. Ligases
*d. Hydrolases
e. Lyases
1525. Ammonia is a toxic substance that is neutralized mainly in hepatic cells in the course of a certain cycle. What cycle is it?
a. Citric acid cycle
b. Glycogenolysis
c. Glycolysis
d. Knoop-Linen cycle
*e. Ornithine cycle
1526. Ammonia is a toxic substance that is neutralized mainly in hepatic cells in the course of a certain cycle. What cycle is it?
a. Citric acid cycle
b. Glycolysis
c. Glycogenolysis
d. Knoop-Linen cycle
*e. Ornithine cycle
1527. Ammonia is a toxic substance that is neutralized mainly in hepatic cells in the course of a certain cycle. What cycle is it?
a. Knoop-Linen cycle
b. Glycogenolysis
c. Glycolysis
*d. Ornithine cycle
e. Citric acid cycle
1528. Amniocentesis detected karyotype 45, X0 in fetal epithelial cells. The mother and father are healthy. What is the likely diagnosis in this case?
*a. Turner syndrome
b. Patau syndrome
c. Cri-du-chat syndrome
d. Trisomy X
e. Edwards syndrome
1529. Amniocentesis detected karyotype 45, X0 in fetal epithelial cells. The mother and father are healthy. What is the likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Patau syndrome
*b. Turner syndrome
c. Trisomy X
d. Cri-du-chat syndrome
e. Edwards syndrome
1530. Amniocentesis detected karyotype 45, X0 in fetal epithelial cells. The mother and father are healthy. What is the likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Patau syndrome
b. Trisomy X
c. Edwards syndrome
d. Cri-du-chat syndrome
*e. Turner syndrome
1531. Among organic substances of a cell there is a polymer composed of dozens, hundreds, and thousands of monomers. This molecule is capable of self-reproduction and can be an information carrier. X-ray structure analysis shows this molecule to consist of two complementary spiral threads. Name this compound:
a. Cellulose
b. Hormone
c. Carbohydrate
d. RNA
*e. DNA
1532. Among organic substances of a cell there is a polymer composed of dozens, hundreds, and thousands of monomers. This molecule is capable of self-reproduction and can be an information carrier. X-ray structure analysis shows this molecule to consist of two complementary spiral threads. Name this compound:
a. Hormone
*b. DNA
c. Cellulose
d. Carbohydrate
e. RNA
1533. Among organic substances of a cell there is a polymer composed of dozens, hundreds, and thousands of monomers. This molecule is capable of self-reproduction and can be an information carrier. X-ray structure analysis shows this molecule to consist of two complementary spiral threads. Name this compound:
a. Hormone
b. Carbohydrate
*c. DNA
d. RNA
e. Cellulose
1534. An 18-year-old man came to a doctor with complaints of a facial deformity. Examination detected a tumor-like formation on his lower jaw. Microscopy revealed that the thickened area of this formation consists of large homogeneous cells, such as histiocytes, and a large number of eosinophils. Horizontal resorption of the patient's interdental septa is observed. What tumor-like disease can be characterized by this histological presentation?
a. Cherubism
b. Fibromatous epulis
c. Fibrous dysplasia
d. Giant cell epulis
*e. Eosinophilic granuloma
1535. An 18-year-old man came to a doctor with complaints of a facial deformity. Examination detected a tumor-like formation on his lower jaw. Microscopy revealed that the thickened area of this formation consists of large homogeneous cells, such as histiocytes, and a large number of eosinophils. Horizontal resorption of the patient's interdental septa is observed. What tumor-like disease can be characterized by this histological presentation?
a. Giant cell epulis
b. Cherubism
c. Fibrous dysplasia
d. Fibromatous epulis
*e. Eosinophilic granuloma
1536. An 18-year-old man came to a doctor with complaints of a facial deformity. Examination detected a tumor-like formation on his lower jaw. Microscopy revealed that the thickened area of this formation consists of large homogeneous cells, such as histiocytes, and a large number of eosinophils. Horizontal resorption of the patient's interdental septa is observed. What tumor-like disease can be characterized by this histological presentation?
a. Giant cell epulis
b. Fibromatous epulis
c. Cherubism
d. Fibrous dysplasia
*e. Eosinophilic granuloma
1537. An 8-year-old child presents with frequent severe subcutaneous hemorrhages. Prescription of Vicasol, synthetic analogue of vitamin K, had a positive effect. This vitamin participates in gamma-carboxylation of glutamic acid in a certain blood-clotting protein. Name this protein:
a. Proconvertin
*b. Prothrombin
c. Fibrinogen
d. Hageman factor
e. Rosenthal factor
1538. An 8-year-old child presents with frequent severe subcutaneous hemorrhages. Prescription of Vicasol, synthetic analogue of vitamin K, had a positive effect. This vitamin participates in gamma-carboxylation of glutamic acid in a certain blood-clotting protein. Name this protein:
a. Proconvertin
b. Fibrinogen
c. Rosenthal factor
d. Hageman factor
*e. Prothrombin
1539. An 8-year-old child presents with frequent severe subcutaneous hemorrhages. Prescription of Vicasol, synthetic analogue of vitamin K, had a positive effect. This vitamin participates in gamma-carboxylation of glutamic acid in a certain blood-clotting protein. Name this protein:
a. Proconvertin
b. Rosenthal factor
*c. Prothrombin
d. Fibrinogen
e. Hageman factor
1540. An 8-year-old girl against the background of a suspected viral infection developed body temperature of 39^o. What medicine should she be prescribed to lower her temperature?
*a. Paracetamol
b. Diphenine (Phenytoin)
c. Nicotinamide
d. Codeine
e. Pentazocine
1541. An 8-year-old girl against the background of a suspected viral infection developed body temperature of 39^o. What medicine should she be prescribed to lower her temperature?
*a. Paracetamol
b. Pentazocine
c. Codeine
d. Nicotinamide
e. Diphenine (Phenytoin)
1542. An 8-year-old girl against the background of a suspected viral infection developed body temperature of 39^o. What medicine should she be prescribed to lower her temperature?
*a. Paracetamol
b. Pentazocine
c. Nicotinamide
d. Diphenine (Phenytoin)
e. Codeine
1543. An 8-year-old schoolboy came to the dentist with a herpetic rash on his lower lip. What medicine will be the most effective in this case and needs to be prescribed for this boy?
a. Furadonin (Nitrofurantoin)
*b. Acyclovir
c. Oxacillin
d. Ampicillin
e. Ketoconazole
1544. An 8-year-old schoolboy came to the dentist with a herpetic rash on his lower lip. What medicine will be the most effective in this case and needs to be prescribed for this boy?
a. Furadonin (Nitrofurantoin)
b. Ketoconazole
*c. Acyclovir
d. Ampicillin
e. Oxacillin
1545. An 8-year-old schoolboy came to the dentist with a herpetic rash on his lower lip. What medicine will be the most effective in this case and needs to be prescribed for this boy?
a. Ketoconazole
b. Oxacillin
c. Ampicillin
d. Furadonin (Nitrofurantoin)
*e. Acyclovir
1546. An 84-year-old patient suffers from parkinsonism. One of the pathogenetic development elements of this disease is deficiency of a certain mediator in some of the brain structures. Name this mediator:
*a. Dopamine
b. Noradrenaline
c. Acetylcholine
d. Histamine
e. Adrenaline
1547. An 84-year-old patient suffers from parkinsonism. One of the pathogenetic development elements of this disease is deficiency of a certain mediator in some of the brain structures. Name this mediator:
a. Histamine
b. Adrenaline
c. Noradrenaline
*d. Dopamine
e. Acetylcholine
1548. An 84-year-old patient suffers from parkinsonism. One of the pathogenetic development elements of this disease is deficiency of a certain mediator in some of the brain structures. Name this mediator:
a. Noradrenaline
b. Acetylcholine
*c. Dopamine
d. Adrenaline
e. Histamine
1549. An AIDS patient presents with revertase enzyme activity in the cells affected by HIV infection. This enzyme takes part in the synthesis of the following nucleic acid:
a. Pre-mRNA
b. rRNA
*c. DNA
d. mRNA
e. tRNA
1550. An AIDS patient presents with revertase enzyme activity in the cells affected by HIV infection. This enzyme takes part in the synthesis of the following nucleic acid:
a. Pre-mRNA
b. rRNA
c. tRNA
d. mRNA
*e. DNA
1551. An AIDS patient presents with revertase enzyme activity in the cells affected by HIV infection. This enzyme takes part in the synthesis of the following nucleic acid:
a. tRNA
b. rRNA
c. mRNA
d. Pre-mRNA
*e. DNA
1552. An HIV-positive patient presents with supressed activity of the immune system. In this case, the immunodeficiency is primarily caused by the damage to a certain group of cells. What cells are damaged?
*a. Helper T cells
b. Killer T cells
c. Plasma cells
d. B lymphocytes
e. Suppressor T cells
1553. An HIV-positive patient presents with supressed activity of the immune system. In this case, the immunodeficiency is primarily caused by the damage to a certain group of cells. What cells are damaged?
a. B lymphocytes
*b. Helper T cells
c. Suppressor T cells
d. Plasma cells
e. Killer T cells
1554. An HIV-positive patient presents with supressed activity of the immune system. In this case, the immunodeficiency is primarily caused by the damage to a certain group of cells. What cells are damaged?
a. Suppressor T cells
b. Killer T cells
c. B lymphocytes
d. Plasma cells
*e. Helper T cells
1555. An acute blood loss has caused a decrease in the systemic blood pressure. This situation can be stabilized with the intensified secretion of a certain hormone. Name this hormone:
*a. Renin
b. Gastrin
c. Glucagon
d. Testosterone
e. Insulin
1556. An acute blood loss has caused a decrease in the systemic blood pressure. This situation can be stabilized with the intensified secretion of a certain hormone. Name this hormone:
*a. Renin
b. Glucagon
c. Gastrin
d. Insulin
e. Testosterone
1557. An acute blood loss has caused a decrease in the systemic blood pressure. This situation can be stabilized with the intensified secretion of a certain hormone. Name this hormone:
a. Gastrin
b. Testosterone
c. Glucagon
*d. Renin
e. Insulin
1558. An athlete before a sports contest presents with elevated blood pressure and heart rate. What part of the CNS induces these changes?
a. Diencephalon
b. Medulla oblongata
c. Hypothalamus
d. Mesencephalon
*e. Cerebral cortex
1559. An athlete before a sports contest presents with elevated blood pressure and heart rate. What part of the CNS induces these changes?
a. Medulla oblongata
*b. Cerebral cortex
c. Mesencephalon
d. Hypothalamus
e. Diencephalon
1560. An athlete before a sports contest presents with elevated blood pressure and heart rate. What part of the CNS induces these changes?
a. Mesencephalon
b. Diencephalon
*c. Cerebral cortex
d. Hypothalamus
e. Medulla oblongata
1561. An athlete overexerted himself during a training and developed a muscle contracture. In such cases the muscle loses its flexibility and gradually becomes rigid due to its inability to relax. What is the likely cause of the contracture in this case?
a. Increased blood levels of K^+
b. Decreased blood levels of Ca^++
c. Increased blood levels of lactic acid
d. Tropomyosin structural changes
*e. ATP deficiency
1562. An athlete overexerted himself during a training and developed a muscle contracture. In such cases the muscle loses its flexibility and gradually becomes rigid due to its inability to relax. What is the likely cause of the contracture in this case?
a. Increased blood levels of K^+
b. Decreased blood levels of Ca^++
c. Tropomyosin structural changes
d. Increased blood levels of lactic acid
*e. ATP deficiency
1563. An autopsy of a 42-year-old man, who suffered from chronic diffuse bronchitis and died of cardiopulmonary failure, shows large hyperinflated lungs that cover mediastinum with their edges. The lungs do not deflate, are colored pale gray, crunch on section; lung surface does not straighten out when pressed with a finger, resulting in a permanent depression. Mucopurulent exudate is produced from the bronchial lumen. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic focal emphysema
b. Vicarious compensatory emphysema
c. Interstitial emphysema
*d. Chronic diffuse obstructive emphysema
e. Primary idiopathic emphysema
1564. An autopsy of a 42-year-old man, who suffered from chronic diffuse bronchitis and died of cardiopulmonary failure, shows large hyperinflated lungs that cover mediastinum with their edges. The lungs do not deflate, are colored pale gray, crunch on section; lung surface does not straighten out when pressed with a finger, resulting in a permanent depression. Mucopurulent exudate is produced from the bronchial lumen. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Primary idiopathic emphysema
b. Chronic focal emphysema
c. Vicarious compensatory emphysema
d. Interstitial emphysema
*e. Chronic diffuse obstructive emphysema
1565. An autopsy of a 42-year-old man, who suffered from chronic diffuse bronchitis and died of cardiopulmonary failure, shows large hyperinflated lungs that cover mediastinum with their edges. The lungs do not deflate, are colored pale gray, crunch on section; lung surface does not straighten out when pressed with a finger, resulting in a permanent depression. Mucopurulent exudate is produced from the bronchial lumen. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Vicarious compensatory emphysema
*b. Chronic diffuse obstructive emphysema
c. Chronic focal emphysema
d. Primary idiopathic emphysema
e. Interstitial emphysema
1566. An autopsy of a person with malaria shows markedly icteric skin, sclerae, and mucosal tunics. The spleen is enlarged and colored slate-gray. Such color of the spleen is caused by the presence of:
*a. Hemomelanin (hemozoin)
b. Hemosiderin
c. Hematoporphyrin
d. Melanin
e. Lipofuscin
1567. An autopsy of a person with malaria shows markedly icteric skin, sclerae, and mucosal tunics. The spleen is enlarged and colored slate-gray. Such color of the spleen is caused by the presence of:
*a. Hemomelanin (hemozoin)
b. Lipofuscin
c. Hematoporphyrin
d. Hemosiderin
e. Melanin
1568. An electrician accidentally touched an exposed electrical wire with both hands and died. What process caused death in this case?
*a. Atrial and ventricular fibrillation
b. Decreased contractility of the myocardium
c. Inhibition of the sinoatrial node automaticity
d. Complete atrioventricular block
e. Impaired vagal heart rate control
1569. An electrician accidentally touched an exposed electrical wire with both hands and died. What process caused death in this case?
a. Decreased contractility of the myocardium
*b. Atrial and ventricular fibrillation
c. Impaired vagal heart rate control
d. Complete atrioventricular block
e. Inhibition of the sinoatrial node automaticity
1570. An electrician accidentally touched an exposed electrical wire with both hands and died. What process caused death in this case?
a. Impaired vagal heart rate control
*b. Atrial and ventricular fibrillation
c. Decreased contractility of the myocardium
d. Complete atrioventricular block
e. Inhibition of the sinoatrial node automaticity
1571. An electron micrograph of red bone marrow shows a megakaryocyte with demarcation channels in its peripheral cytoplasm. What is the function of these structures?
*a. Platelet formation
b. Increasing the surface area of cells
c. Cell destruction
d. Increasing the number of ion channels
e. Cell division
1572. An electron micrograph of red bone marrow shows a megakaryocyte with demarcation channels in its peripheral cytoplasm. What is the function of these structures?
a. Cell division
b. Increasing the surface area of cells
c. Cell destruction
d. Increasing the number of ion channels
*e. Platelet formation
1573. An electron micrograph of red bone marrow shows a megakaryocyte with demarcation channels in its peripheral cytoplasm. What is the function of these structures?
a. Increasing the surface area of cells
*b. Platelet formation
c. Cell destruction
d. Increasing the number of ion channels
e. Cell division
1574. An electron micrograph shows a fibroblast that produces components of the intercellular substance. What organelles take part in this process?
*a. Granular endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi complex
b. Granular and agranular endoplasmic reticula
c. Golgi complex and lysosomes
d. Golgi complex and mitochondria
e. Agranular endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi complex
1575. An electron micrograph shows a fibroblast that produces components of the intercellular substance. What organelles take part in this process?
a. Agranular endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi complex
b. Golgi complex and lysosomes
c. Golgi complex and mitochondria
*d. Granular endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi complex
e. Granular and agranular endoplasmic reticula
1576. An electron micrograph shows a fibroblast that produces components of the intercellular substance. What organelles take part in this process?
a. Granular and agranular endoplasmic reticula
b. Agranular endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi complex
c. Golgi complex and mitochondria
d. Golgi complex and lysosomes
*e. Granular endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi complex
1577. An electronic microphotograph of a cell shows two different protein-destroying organelles. Name them:
a. Endoplasmic reticulum and microfilament
*b. Lysosomes and proteasomes
c. Golgi complex and microtubules
d. Peroxisomes and ribosomes
e. Ribosomes
1578. An electronic microphotograph of a cell shows two different protein-destroying organelles. Name them:
a. Endoplasmic reticulum and microfilament
*b. Lysosomes and proteasomes
c. Golgi complex and microtubules
d. Ribosomes
e. Peroxisomes and ribosomes
1579. An electronic microphotograph of a cell shows two different protein-destroying organelles. Name them:
a. Endoplasmic reticulum and microfilament
b. Peroxisomes and ribosomes
c. Golgi complex and microtubules
d. Ribosomes
*e. Lysosomes and proteasomes
1580. An enzyme, connected to substrate, interacts with it only with a part of its molecule. Name this part:
*a. Active center
b. Cofactor
c. Polypeptide chain portion
d. Coenzyme
e. Allosteric center
1581. An enzyme, connected to substrate, interacts with it only with a part of its molecule. Name this part:
a. Cofactor
b. Allosteric center
c. Polypeptide chain portion
*d. Active center
e. Coenzyme
1582. An enzyme, connected to substrate, interacts with it only with a part of its molecule. Name this part:
a. Polypeptide chain portion
b. Allosteric center
*c. Active center
d. Coenzyme
e. Cofactor
1583. An examination of the oral cavity of a 50-year-old man, who is a long-term smoker, detected on the lingual mucosa an irregularly-shaped whitish plaque. Histologically, there are thickening of the stratified squamous epithelium, parakeratosis, hyperkeratosis, and acanthosis. Specify the type of the pathological process:
*a. Leukoplakia
b. Chronic stomatitis
c. Avitaminosis A
d. Hypertrophic glossitis
e. Keratoacanthoma
1584. An examination of the oral cavity of a 50-year-old man, who is a long-term smoker, detected on the lingual mucosa an irregularly-shaped whitish plaque. Histologically, there are thickening of the stratified squamous epithelium, parakeratosis, hyperkeratosis, and acanthosis. Specify the type of the pathological process:
a. Chronic stomatitis
b. Keratoacanthoma
*c. Leukoplakia
d. Avitaminosis A
e. Hypertrophic glossitis
1585. An examination of the oral cavity of a 50-year-old man, who is a long-term smoker, detected on the lingual mucosa an irregularly-shaped whitish plaque. Histologically, there are thickening of the stratified squamous epithelium, parakeratosis, hyperkeratosis, and acanthosis. Specify the type of the pathological process:
a. Keratoacanthoma
b. Avitaminosis A
c. Hypertrophic glossitis
d. Chronic stomatitis
*e. Leukoplakia
1586. An examination of tooth 16 revealed a cavity on its masticatory surface. The cavity has a narrow opening and is filled with softened dentin. Microscopically, there are bacteria in the dilated dentinal canaliculi, some canaliculi are destroyed, the cavities merge together into caverns, decalcification of enamel and dentin occurs without formation of the replacement dentin. Make the diagnosis:
a. Acute superficial dental caries
*b. Acute deep dental caries
c. Chronic deep dental caries
d. Dental caries at the stage of white spot lesions
e. Chronic superficial dental caries
1587. An examination of tooth 16 revealed a cavity on its masticatory surface. The cavity has a narrow opening and is filled with softened dentin. Microscopically, there are bacteria in the dilated dentinal canaliculi, some canaliculi are destroyed, the cavities merge together into caverns, decalcification of enamel and dentin occurs without formation of the replacement dentin. Make the diagnosis:
a. Chronic deep dental caries
b. Dental caries at the stage of white spot lesions
c. Chronic superficial dental caries
*d. Acute deep dental caries
e. Acute superficial dental caries
1588. An examination of tooth 16 revealed a cavity on its masticatory surface. The cavity has a narrow opening and is filled with softened dentin. Microscopically, there are bacteria in the dilated dentinal canaliculi, some canaliculi are destroyed, the cavities merge together into caverns, decalcification of enamel and dentin occurs without formation of the replacement dentin. Make the diagnosis:
a. Chronic superficial dental caries
b. Dental caries at the stage of white spot lesions
*c. Acute deep dental caries
d. Acute superficial dental caries
e. Chronic deep dental caries
1589. An excessive bone tissue loss is often observed in older people, which indicates osteoporosis development. What bone tissue cells are activated, resulting in the development of this disease?
*a. Osteoclasts
b. Macrophages
c. Tissue basophils
d. Osteocytes
e. Osteoblasts
1590. An excessive bone tissue loss is often observed in older people, which indicates osteoporosis development. What bone tissue cells are activated, resulting in the development of this disease?
a. Osteoblasts
b. Macrophages
c. Tissue basophils
*d. Osteoclasts
e. Osteocytes
1591. An excessive bone tissue loss is often observed in older people, which indicates osteoporosis development. What bone tissue cells are activated, resulting in the development of this disease?
a. Osteocytes
b. Macrophages
c. Osteoblasts
d. Tissue basophils
*e. Osteoclasts
1592. An experiment was conducted to measure the threshold of tactile receptors stimulation with various stimuli. What stimulus will have the lowest threshold?
a. Cold stimulus
*b. Mechanical stimulus
c. Photic stimulus
d. Heat stimulus
e. Chemical stimulus
1593. An experiment was conducted to measure the threshold of tactile receptors stimulation with various stimuli. What stimulus will have the lowest threshold?
a. Cold stimulus
b. Photic stimulus
c. Chemical stimulus
d. Heat stimulus
*e. Mechanical stimulus
1594. An experiment was conducted to measure the threshold of tactile receptors stimulation with various stimuli. What stimulus will have the lowest threshold?
a. Heat stimulus
*b. Mechanical stimulus
c. Cold stimulus
d. Photic stimulus
e. Chemical stimulus
1595. An experimental animal, a dog, received a weak solution of hydrochloric acid through a tube inserted into the duodenum. Primarily it will result in increased secretion of the following hormone:
a. Cholecystokinin
*b. Secretin
c. Gastrin
d. Neurotensin
e. Histamine
1596. An experimental animal, a dog, received a weak solution of hydrochloric acid through a tube inserted into the duodenum. Primarily it will result in increased secretion of the following hormone:
a. Histamine
*b. Secretin
c. Neurotensin
d. Gastrin
e. Cholecystokinin
1597. An experimet was conducted to study major indicators of hemodynamics. What hemodynamics indicator would be the same for both systemic and pulmonary circulation?
*a. Volumetric blood flow rate
b. Mean arterial pressure
c. Vascular resistance
d. Linear blood flow velocity
e. Dyastolic blood pressure
1598. An experimet was conducted to study major indicators of hemodynamics. What hemodynamics indicator would be the same for both systemic and pulmonary circulation?
a. Dyastolic blood pressure
*b. Volumetric blood flow rate
c. Linear blood flow velocity
d. Vascular resistance
e. Mean arterial pressure
1599. An experimet was conducted to study major indicators of hemodynamics. What hemodynamics indicator would be the same for both systemic and pulmonary circulation?
a. Vascular resistance
b. Mean arterial pressure
*c. Volumetric blood flow rate
d. Linear blood flow velocity
e. Dyastolic blood pressure
1600. An inoculation of intestinal microorganisms on the Endo medium results in the growth of colonies that can be either colored or colorless. This process is based on the fermentation of a certain carbohydrate. Name this carbohydrate:
*a. Lactose
b. Glucose
c. Sucrose
d. Arabinose
e. Maltose
1601. An inoculation of intestinal microorganisms on the Endo medium results in the growth of colonies that can be either colored or colorless. This process is based on the fermentation of a certain carbohydrate. Name this carbohydrate:
a. Glucose
*b. Lactose
c. Maltose
d. Sucrose
e. Arabinose
1602. An inoculation of intestinal microorganisms on the Endo medium results in the growth of colonies that can be either colored or colorless. This process is based on the fermentation of a certain carbohydrate. Name this carbohydrate:
a. Sucrose
*b. Lactose
c. Maltose
d. Arabinose
e. Glucose
1603. An inoculation of pus, obtained from a furuncle, revealed spheric microorganisms arranged in ''grape clusters''. What microbes were detected?
a. Micrococci
b. Streptococci
c. Diplococci
*d. Staphylococci
e. Tetracocci
1604. An inoculation of pus, obtained from a furuncle, revealed spheric microorganisms arranged in ''grape clusters''. What microbes were detected?
a. Streptococci
b. Micrococci
c. Tetracocci
*d. Staphylococci
e. Diplococci
1605. An inoculation of pus, obtained from a furuncle, revealed spheric microorganisms arranged in ''grape clusters''. What microbes were detected?
a. Tetracocci
*b. Staphylococci
c. Diplococci
d. Micrococci
e. Streptococci
1606. An odontogenic cyst, connectd to the second premolar, was removed from the patient's maxillary alveolar process. Histologically, the cystic wall is lined with stratified squamous epithelium and a hard structure resembling a rudimentary tooth is located in the cystic cavity. Make the diagnosis:
*a. Follicular cyst
b. Radicular cyst
c. Primordial cyst
d. Dermoid cyst
e. Teratoma
1607. An odontogenic cyst, connectd to the second premolar, was removed from the patient's maxillary alveolar process. Histologically, the cystic wall is lined with stratified squamous epithelium and a hard structure resembling a rudimentary tooth is located in the cystic cavity. Make the diagnosis:
a. Dermoid cyst
*b. Follicular cyst
c. Primordial cyst
d. Radicular cyst
e. Teratoma
1608. An odontogenic cyst, connectd to the second premolar, was removed from the patient's maxillary alveolar process. Histologically, the cystic wall is lined with stratified squamous epithelium and a hard structure resembling a rudimentary tooth is located in the cystic cavity. Make the diagnosis:
a. Primordial cyst
b. Dermoid cyst
*c. Follicular cyst
d. Teratoma
e. Radicular cyst
1609. An older person presents with changes in the force of cardiac contractions and in the physical properties of the vasculature, which is clearly visible in the graphic recording of the pulse waves over the carotid artery. What examination method was used?
*a. Sphygmography
b. Plethysmography
c. Phlebography
d. Myography
e. Rheography
1610. An older person presents with changes in the force of cardiac contractions and in the physical properties of the vasculature, which is clearly visible in the graphic recording of the pulse waves over the carotid artery. What examination method was used?
a. Phlebography
b. Myography
c. Rheography
d. Plethysmography
*e. Sphygmography
1611. An older person presents with changes in the force of cardiac contractions and in the physical properties of the vasculature, which is clearly visible in the graphic recording of the pulse waves over the carotid artery. What examination method was used?
a. Rheography
b. Myography
c. Phlebography
*d. Sphygmography
e. Plethysmography
1612. An ophthalmologist suspects blennorrhea (gonococcal conjunctivitis) in a child with signs of suppurative keratoconjunctivitis. What laboratory diagnostics should be conducted to confirm the diagnosis?
*a. Microscopy and bacteriological analysis
b. Serum diagnostics and allergy test
c. Biological analysis and allergy test
d. Biological analysis and phagodiagnostics
e. Microscopy and serum diagnostics
1613. An ophthalmologist suspects blennorrhea (gonococcal conjunctivitis) in a child with signs of suppurative keratoconjunctivitis. What laboratory diagnostics should be conducted to confirm the diagnosis?
a. Biological analysis and allergy test
b. Microscopy and serum diagnostics
c. Biological analysis and phagodiagnostics
*d. Microscopy and bacteriological analysis
e. Serum diagnostics and allergy test
1614. An ophthalmologist suspects blennorrhea (gonococcal conjunctivitis) in a child with signs of suppurative keratoconjunctivitis. What laboratory diagnostics should be conducted to confirm the diagnosis?
a. Serum diagnostics and allergy test
*b. Microscopy and bacteriological analysis
c. Biological analysis and phagodiagnostics
d. Microscopy and serum diagnostics
e. Biological analysis and allergy test
1615. An organ of the cardiovascular system is composed of cells that connect to each other with intercalated discs. What organ is it?
a. Aorta
*b. Heart
c. Mixed type artery
d. Muscular artery
e. Muscular vein
1616. An organ of the cardiovascular system is composed of cells that connect to each other with intercalated discs. What organ is it?
a. Mixed type artery
*b. Heart
c. Muscular vein
d. Aorta
e. Muscular artery
1617. An organ of the cardiovascular system is composed of cells that connect to each other with intercalated discs. What organ is it?
a. Muscular vein
b. Aorta
*c. Heart
d. Muscular artery
e. Mixed type artery
1618. An outbreak of intestinal infection was registered at a kindergarten. Bacteriology of the patient's feces detected no pathogenic bacteria. Electron microscopy revealed round formations with clear margins and a thick sleeve, resembling a wheel. What is the most likely causative agent of this infection?
*a. Rotavirus
b. Coxsackievirus
c. E) coli
d. Adenovirus
e. P. vulgaris
1619. An outbreak of intestinal infection was registered at a kindergarten. Bacteriology of the patient's feces detected no pathogenic bacteria. Electron microscopy revealed round formations with clear margins and a thick sleeve, resembling a wheel. What is the most likely causative agent of this infection?
*a. Rotavirus
b. P. vulgaris
c. E) coli
d. Adenovirus
e. Coxsackievirus
1620. An outbreak of intestinal infection was registered at a kindergarten. Bacteriology of the patient's feces detected no pathogenic bacteria. Electron microscopy revealed round formations with clear margins and a thick sleeve, resembling a wheel. What is the most likely causative agent of this infection?
a. Coxsackievirus
b. E) coli
c. Adenovirus
d. P. vulgaris
*e. Rotavirus
1621. An unconscious man with carbon monoxide poisoning was brought to the hospital by an ambulance. In his case, hypoxia is caused by accumulation of the following in the blood:
*a. Carboxyhemoglobin
b. Oxyhemoglobin
c. Sulfhemoglobin
d. Methemoglobin
e. Carbhemoglobin
1622. An unconscious man with carbon monoxide poisoning was brought to the hospital by an ambulance. In his case, hypoxia is caused by accumulation of the following in the blood:
a. Oxyhemoglobin
b. Methemoglobin
c. Carbhemoglobin
d. Sulfhemoglobin
*e. Carboxyhemoglobin
1623. An unconscious man with carbon monoxide poisoning was brought to the hospital by an ambulance. In his case, hypoxia is caused by accumulation of the following in the blood:
a. Sulfhemoglobin
b. Carbhemoglobin
*c. Carboxyhemoglobin
d. Oxyhemoglobin
e. Methemoglobin
1624. Analgin (metamizole) effectively relieves pulpitis-induced pain not only after its resorptive administration, but after topical administration as well. What action of this drug results in anesthetic effect in the latter case?
a. Inhibition of P substance release
b. Counter-attracting action
c. Local anesthetic effect of Analgin (Metamizole)
d. Inhibition of algogenic kinin formation
*e. Cyclooxygenase-2 inhibition
1625. Analgin (metamizole) effectively relieves pulpitis-induced pain not only after its resorptive administration, but after topical administration as well. What action of this drug results in anesthetic effect in the latter case?
a. Inhibition of P substance release
b. Inhibition of algogenic kinin formation
*c. Cyclooxygenase-2 inhibition
d. Counter-attracting action
e. Local anesthetic effect of Analgin (Metamizole)
1626. Analgin (metamizole) effectively relieves pulpitis-induced pain not only after its resorptive administration, but after topical administration as well. What action of this drug results in anesthetic effect in the latter case?
a. Local anesthetic effect of Analgin (Metamizole)
*b. Cyclooxygenase-2 inhibition
c. Inhibition of algogenic kinin formation
d. Inhibition of P substance release
e. Counter-attracting action
1627. Analysis of sputum taken from a patient with suspected pneumonia revealed slightly elongated gram-positive diplococci with tapered opposite ends. What microorganisms were revealed in the sputum?
*a. Streptococcus pneumoniae
b. Staphylococcus aureus
c. Neisseria meningitidis
d. Neisseria gonorrhoeae
e. Klebsiella pneumoniae
1628. Analysis of sputum taken from a patient with suspected pneumonia revealed slightly elongated gram-positive diplococci with tapered opposite ends. What microorganisms were revealed in the sputum?
a. Klebsiella pneumoniae
b. Neisseria meningitidis
c. Neisseria gonorrhoeae
*d. Streptococcus pneumoniae
e. Staphylococcus aureus
1629. Analysis of sputum taken from a patient with suspected pneumonia revealed slightly elongated gram-positive diplococci with tapered opposite ends. What microorganisms were revealed in the sputum?
a. Staphylococcus aureus
b. Neisseria gonorrhoeae
c. Neisseria meningitidis
d. Klebsiella pneumoniae
*e. Streptococcus pneumoniae
1630. Aortic stenosis was detected in a young woman, but no circulatory disorders were observed in the patient. What immediate mechanism ensures cardiac compensation in such cases?
*a. Homeometric
b. Heterometric
c. Myogenic dilation
d. Increased blood pressure
e. Decreased heart weight
1631. Aortic stenosis was detected in a young woman, but no circulatory disorders were observed in the patient. What immediate mechanism ensures cardiac compensation in such cases?
a. Heterometric
b. Myogenic dilation
c. Increased blood pressure
d. Decreased heart weight
*e. Homeometric
1632. Aortic stenosis was detected in a young woman, but no circulatory disorders were observed in the patient. What immediate mechanism ensures cardiac compensation in such cases?
a. Increased blood pressure
b. Decreased heart weight
c. Heterometric
d. Myogenic dilation
*e. Homeometric
1633. At a certain stage of human ontogenesis, physiological bond occurs between circulatory systems of the mother and the fetus. This function is being carried out by the following provisory organ:
*a. Placenta
b. Yolk sac
c. Serous tunic
d. Amnion
e. Allantois
1634. At a certain stage of human ontogenesis, physiological bond occurs between circulatory systems of the mother and the fetus. This function is being carried out by the following provisory organ:
a. Amnion
*b. Placenta
c. Yolk sac
d. Allantois
e. Serous tunic
1635. At a certain stage of human ontogenesis, physiological bond occurs between circulatory systems of the mother and the fetus. This function is being carried out by the following provisory organ:
a. Serous tunic
b. Yolk sac
*c. Placenta
d. Amnion
e. Allantois
1636. At the cementoenamel junction there are non-calcified areas, through which infection often penetrates into the tooth. Name these structures:
a. Odontoblasts
*b. Enamel tufts
c. Enamel prisms
d. Tomes' dentinal fiber
e. Ameloblasts
1637. At the cementoenamel junction there are non-calcified areas, through which infection often penetrates into the tooth. Name these structures:
a. Odontoblasts
*b. Enamel tufts
c. Tomes' dentinal fiber
d. Enamel prisms
e. Ameloblasts
1638. At the cementoenamel junction there are non-calcified areas, through which infection often penetrates into the tooth. Name these structures:
a. Odontoblasts
b. Ameloblasts
*c. Enamel tufts
d. Tomes' dentinal fiber
e. Enamel prisms
1639. At the crown apex of the second molar, on the surface that comes into contacts with the cheek, the doctor detected a carious cavity. Name the affected crown surface:
*a. Facies vestibularis
b. Facies lingualis
c. Facies occlusalis
d. Facies distalis
e. Facies mesialis
1640. At the crown apex of the second molar, on the surface that comes into contacts with the cheek, the doctor detected a carious cavity. Name the affected crown surface:
a. Facies mesialis
b. Facies occlusalis
c. Facies lingualis
d. Facies distalis
*e. Facies vestibularis
1641. At the crown apex of the second molar, on the surface that comes into contacts with the cheek, the doctor detected a carious cavity. Name the affected crown surface:
a. Facies occlusalis
b. Facies lingualis
c. Facies distalis
*d. Facies vestibularis
e. Facies mesialis
1642. At the end of winter a student, who had been lately in the state of nervous tension, developed a case of URTI after overexposure to cold. What is the case of this disease?
a. Improper diet
b. Hypovitaminosis
*c. Pathogenic agent
d. Nervous stress
e. Overexposure to cold
1643. At the end of winter a student, who had been lately in the state of nervous tension, developed a case of URTI after overexposure to cold. What is the case of this disease?
a. Nervous stress
*b. Pathogenic agent
c. Hypovitaminosis
d. Overexposure to cold
e. Improper diet
1644. At the end of winter a student, who had been lately in the state of nervous tension, developed a case of URTI after overexposure to cold. What is the case of this disease?
a. Nervous stress
b. Improper diet
*c. Pathogenic agent
d. Overexposure to cold
e. Hypovitaminosis
1645. At the sixth month of pregnancy a woman developed marked iron-deficiency anemia. The diagnostic character of this disease is the appearance of the following in the blood:
a. Macrocytes
b. Poikilocytes
c. Normocytes
*d. Annulocytes
e. Reticulocytes
1646. At the sixth month of pregnancy a woman developed marked iron-deficiency anemia. The diagnostic character of this disease is the appearance of the following in the blood:
a. Normocytes
b. Macrocytes
c. Poikilocytes
d. Reticulocytes
*e. Annulocytes
1647. At the sixth month of pregnancy a woman developed marked iron-deficiency anemia. The diagnostic character of this disease is the appearance of the following in the blood:
a. Reticulocytes
*b. Annulocytes
c. Normocytes
d. Macrocytes
e. Poikilocytes
1648. Auscultation detects a murmur in the projection of the patient's cardiac apex. What heart valve is likely to have a defect in this case?
*a. Mitral valve
b. -
c. Aortic valve
d. Pulmonary trunk valve
e. Tricuspid valve
1649. Auscultation detects a murmur in the projection of the patient's cardiac apex. What heart valve is likely to have a defect in this case?
a. Pulmonary trunk valve
*b. Mitral valve
c. Aortic valve
d. Tricuspid valve
e. -
1650. Auscultation detects a murmur in the projection of the patient's cardiac apex. What heart valve is likely to have a defect in this case?
a. Tricuspid valve
b. Aortic valve
*c. Mitral valve
d. -
e. Pulmonary trunk valve
1651. Auscultation reveals that in the patient's II intercostal space along the parasternal line on the right the II heart sound is better heard than the I heart sound. What valve produces this sound when closing?
*a. Semilunar aortic valve
b. Tricuspid valve
c. Bicuspid and tricuspid valves
d. Semilunar pulmonary valve
e. Bicuspid valve
1652. Auscultation reveals that in the patient's II intercostal space along the parasternal line on the right the II heart sound is better heard than the I heart sound. What valve produces this sound when closing?
a. Tricuspid valve
b. Bicuspid and tricuspid valves
*c. Semilunar aortic valve
d. Semilunar pulmonary valve
e. Bicuspid valve
1653. Auscultation reveals that in the patient's II intercostal space along the parasternal line on the right the II heart sound is better heard than the I heart sound. What valve produces this sound when closing?
a. Tricuspid valve
b. Bicuspid valve
c. Semilunar pulmonary valve
d. Bicuspid and tricuspid valves
*e. Semilunar aortic valve
1654. Autopsy of a 2-year-old child, who died of meningitis, shows absence of thymus and T-dependent areas in the peripheral lymphoid tissue. What immunodeficiency syndrome can be characterized by these changes?
*a. Cellular immunodeficiency syndrome
b. Secondary immunodeficiency syndrome
c. Combined immunodeficiency syndrome
d. Humoral immunodeficiency syndrome
e. Deficiency syndrome of monocytic phagocytes
1655. Autopsy of a 2-year-old child, who died of meningitis, shows absence of thymus and T-dependent areas in the peripheral lymphoid tissue. What immunodeficiency syndrome can be characterized by these changes?
a. Deficiency syndrome of monocytic phagocytes
b. Combined immunodeficiency syndrome
c. Humoral immunodeficiency syndrome
*d. Cellular immunodeficiency syndrome
e. Secondary immunodeficiency syndrome
1656. Autopsy of a 2-year-old child, who died of meningitis, shows absence of thymus and T-dependent areas in the peripheral lymphoid tissue. What immunodeficiency syndrome can be characterized by these changes?
a. Deficiency syndrome of monocytic phagocytes
b. Humoral immunodeficiency syndrome
c. Combined immunodeficiency syndrome
*d. Cellular immunodeficiency syndrome
e. Secondary immunodeficiency syndrome
1657. Autopsy of a 46-year-old man, who had untreated enteric infection and died of sepsis, revealed the following: perirectal phlegmon, multiple ulcers of the rectum and sigmoid colon, some of which are perforated; mucosa of these intestinal segments is thickened and covered with firmly attached grayish films. What is the most likely disease in this case?
a. Cholera
b. Typhoid fever
*c. Dysentery
d. Tuberculosis
e. Amebiasis
1658. Autopsy of a 46-year-old man, who had untreated enteric infection and died of sepsis, revealed the following: perirectal phlegmon, multiple ulcers of the rectum and sigmoid colon, some of which are perforated; mucosa of these intestinal segments is thickened and covered with firmly attached grayish films. What is the most likely disease in this case?
a. Typhoid fever
*b. Dysentery
c. Tuberculosis
d. Amebiasis
e. Cholera
1659. Autopsy of a 46-year-old man, who had untreated enteric infection and died of sepsis, revealed the following: perirectal phlegmon, multiple ulcers of the rectum and sigmoid colon, some of which are perforated; mucosa of these intestinal segments is thickened and covered with firmly attached grayish films. What is the most likely disease in this case?
a. Typhoid fever
b. Cholera
*c. Dysentery
d. Amebiasis
e. Tuberculosis
1660. Autopsy of a 52-year-old man revealed changes in his lungs: there is a segmented area of caseous necrosis in the upper right lung; the segments merge with each other. The lung is enlarged, dense, yellowish-colored on section; there are fibrinous films on the pleura. Name the type of tuberculosis:
*a. Caseous pneumonia
b. Cirrhotic tuberculosis
c. Tuberculoma
d. Infiltrative tuberculosis
e. Acute cavernous tuberculosis
1661. Autopsy of a 52-year-old man revealed changes in his lungs: there is a segmented area of caseous necrosis in the upper right lung; the segments merge with each other. The lung is enlarged, dense, yellowish-colored on section; there are fibrinous films on the pleura. Name the type of tuberculosis:
*a. Caseous pneumonia
b. Infiltrative tuberculosis
c. Cirrhotic tuberculosis
d. Acute cavernous tuberculosis
e. Tuberculoma
1662. Autopsy of a 52-year-old man revealed changes in his lungs: there is a segmented area of caseous necrosis in the upper right lung; the segments merge with each other. The lung is enlarged, dense, yellowish-colored on section; there are fibrinous films on the pleura. Name the type of tuberculosis:
a. Acute cavernous tuberculosis
b. Cirrhotic tuberculosis
c. Infiltrative tuberculosis
*d. Caseous pneumonia
e. Tuberculoma
1663. Autopsy of a 7-year-old child, who died of uncompensated congenital heart disease, revealed increase in mass and volume of the thymus. On microscopy thymus structure is normal. What pathologic process had occurred in the thymus?
*a. Congenital thymomegaly
b. Thymic dysplasia
c. Accidental involution
d. Thymic agenesis
e. Thymoma
1664. Autopsy of a 7-year-old child, who died of uncompensated congenital heart disease, revealed increase in mass and volume of the thymus. On microscopy thymus structure is normal. What pathologic process had occurred in the thymus?
a. Accidental involution
*b. Congenital thymomegaly
c. Thymoma
d. Thymic dysplasia
e. Thymic agenesis
1665. Autopsy of a 7-year-old child, who died of uncompensated congenital heart disease, revealed increase in mass and volume of the thymus. On microscopy thymus structure is normal. What pathologic process had occurred in the thymus?
a. Thymic agenesis
b. Thymoma
c. Accidental involution
d. Thymic dysplasia
*e. Congenital thymomegaly
1666. Autopsy of a 72-year-old man with recurrent transmural myocardial infarction revealed his epicardium and pericardium membranes to be swollen, thickened, coarce, as if covered in hair. Name the type of inflammation that occurred in the cardiac membranes:
a. Catarrhal
b. Serous
c. Suppurative
*d. Croupous
e. Diphtheritic
1667. Autopsy of a 72-year-old man with recurrent transmural myocardial infarction revealed his epicardium and pericardium membranes to be swollen, thickened, coarce, as if covered in hair. Name the type of inflammation that occurred in the cardiac membranes:
a. Catarrhal
b. Suppurative
*c. Croupous
d. Serous
e. Diphtheritic
1668. Autopsy of a 72-year-old man with recurrent transmural myocardial infarction revealed his epicardium and pericardium membranes to be swollen, thickened, coarce, as if covered in hair. Name the type of inflammation that occurred in the cardiac membranes:
a. Serous
b. Catarrhal
c. Diphtheritic
d. Suppurative
*e. Croupous
1669. Autopsy of a man who died of ethylene glycol poisoning revealed that his kidneys are slightly enlarged, edematic; their capsule can be easily removed. Cortical substance is broad and light gray. Medullary substance is dark red. What pathology did this man develop?
*a. Necrotic nephrosis
b. Acute pyelonephritis
c. Lipoid nephrosis
d. Acute tubular-interstitial nephritis
e. Acute glomerulonephritis
1670. Autopsy of a man who died of ethylene glycol poisoning revealed that his kidneys are slightly enlarged, edematic; their capsule can be easily removed. Cortical substance is broad and light gray. Medullary substance is dark red. What pathology did this man develop?
a. Acute glomerulonephritis
b. Acute tubular-interstitial nephritis
c. Lipoid nephrosis
d. Acute pyelonephritis
*e. Necrotic nephrosis
1671. Autopsy of a man who died of ethylene glycol poisoning revealed that his kidneys are slightly enlarged, edematic; their capsule can be easily removed. Cortical substance is broad and light gray. Medullary substance is dark red. What pathology did this man develop?
a. Lipoid nephrosis
b. Acute tubular-interstitial nephritis
*c. Necrotic nephrosis
d. Acute pyelonephritis
e. Acute glomerulonephritis
1672. Autopsy of a man, who died suddenly with signs of acutely disturbed cerebral circulation, revealed aneurysm rupture of the medial cerebral artery and a round cavity 4 cm in diameter filled with blood in his frontal lobe. Name this type of hemorrhage:
a. -
*b. Hematoma
c. Contusion
d. Hemorrhagic infiltration
e. Petechiae
1673. Autopsy of a man, who died suddenly with signs of acutely disturbed cerebral circulation, revealed aneurysm rupture of the medial cerebral artery and a round cavity 4 cm in diameter filled with blood in his frontal lobe. Name this type of hemorrhage:
a. -
b. Petechiae
c. Contusion
*d. Hematoma
e. Hemorrhagic infiltration
1674. Autopsy of a man, who died suddenly with signs of acutely disturbed cerebral circulation, revealed aneurysm rupture of the medial cerebral artery and a round cavity 4 cm in diameter filled with blood in his frontal lobe. Name this type of hemorrhage:
a. Petechiae
b. Hemorrhagic infiltration
c. -
d. Contusion
*e. Hematoma
1675. Autopsy of a patient, who died of heart failure, shows yellow spots and streaks in the the aortic and coronary intima, as well as gray-yellow plaque, protruding from the intima surface. The plaque is focally ulcerated and presents with hemorrhages, thrombi, and calcified foci. Such vascular alterations are characteristic of:
*a. Atherosclerosis
b. Periarteritis nodosa
c. Essential hypertension
d. -
e. Syphilitic mesaortitis
1676. Autopsy of a patient, who died of heart failure, shows yellow spots and streaks in the the aortic and coronary intima, as well as gray-yellow plaque, protruding from the intima surface. The plaque is focally ulcerated and presents with hemorrhages, thrombi, and calcified foci. Such vascular alterations are characteristic of:
a. -
b. Syphilitic mesaortitis
c. Periarteritis nodosa
*d. Atherosclerosis
e. Essential hypertension
1677. Autopsy of a patient, who died of heart failure, shows yellow spots and streaks in the the aortic and coronary intima, as well as gray-yellow plaque, protruding from the intima surface. The plaque is focally ulcerated and presents with hemorrhages, thrombi, and calcified foci. Such vascular alterations are characteristic of:
a. Syphilitic mesaortitis
b. -
c. Periarteritis nodosa
d. Essential hypertension
*e. Atherosclerosis
1678. Autopsy of an 86-year-old woman, who suffered from cerebral atherosclerosis, shows atrophy of her cerebral cortex. Name this type of atrophy based on its cause:
a. Neurogenic
*b. Insufficient blood supply
c. Caused by physico-chemical factors
d. Dysfunctional
e. Pressure-induced
1679. Autopsy of an 86-year-old woman, who suffered from cerebral atherosclerosis, shows atrophy of her cerebral cortex. Name this type of atrophy based on its cause:
a. Pressure-induced
b. Caused by physico-chemical factors
*c. Insufficient blood supply
d. Neurogenic
e. Dysfunctional
1680. Autopsy of an 86-year-old woman, who suffered from cerebral atherosclerosis, shows atrophy of her cerebral cortex. Name this type of atrophy based on its cause:
a. Pressure-induced
b. Dysfunctional
*c. Insufficient blood supply
d. Neurogenic
e. Caused by physico-chemical factors
1681. Autopsy of the body of a 43-year-old man, who died of cardiopulmonary failure, shows a cavity 3 cm in diameter, filled with viscous green-gray content, in the lower lobe of the right lung. Histology shows that the wall of this structure is made of connective tissue and immature granulation tissue, while the lumen contains neutrophilic leukocytes and products of their breakdown. What type of inflammation is it?
*a. Chronic abscess
b. Empyema
c. Carbuncle
d. Acute abscess
e. Furuncle
1682. Autopsy of the body of a 43-year-old man, who died of cardiopulmonary failure, shows a cavity 3 cm in diameter, filled with viscous green-gray content, in the lower lobe of the right lung. Histology shows that the wall of this structure is made of connective tissue and immature granulation tissue, while the lumen contains neutrophilic leukocytes and products of their breakdown. What type of inflammation is it?
a. Acute abscess
b. Furuncle
c. Carbuncle
*d. Chronic abscess
e. Empyema
1683. Autopsy of the body of a 43-year-old man, who died of cardiopulmonary failure, shows a cavity 3 cm in diameter, filled with viscous green-gray content, in the lower lobe of the right lung. Histology shows that the wall of this structure is made of connective tissue and immature granulation tissue, while the lumen contains neutrophilic leukocytes and products of their breakdown. What type of inflammation is it?
a. Empyema
b. Carbuncle
*c. Chronic abscess
d. Acute abscess
e. Furuncle
1684. Autopsy of the body of a 62-year-old man detected a focus of tissue breakdown in the liver. The lesion is 4 cm in diameter and filled with a yellowish-green fluid. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Carbuncle
*b. Abscess
c. Empyema
d. Granuloma
e. Phlegmon
1685. Autopsy of the body of a 62-year-old man detected a focus of tissue breakdown in the liver. The lesion is 4 cm in diameter and filled with a yellowish-green fluid. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Empyema
b. Carbuncle
c. Phlegmon
*d. Abscess
e. Granuloma
1686. Autopsy of the body of a 62-year-old man detected a focus of tissue breakdown in the liver. The lesion is 4 cm in diameter and filled with a yellowish-green fluid. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Phlegmon
b. Carbuncle
c. Granuloma
d. Empyema
*e. Abscess
1687. Autopsy of the body of a 62-year-old man, who died with progressing signs of heart failure, revealed enlarged heart. The heart is flaccid and its chambers are distended. The myocardium is dull and clay-yellow on section. The endocardium has yellow-white stripes that is especially marked in the papillary muscles. What pathological process is the most likely?
a. Dilated cardiomyopathy
*b. Fatty degeneration of the myocardium
c. Cardiosclerosis
d. Myomalacia
e. Fatty heart
1688. Autopsy of the body of a 62-year-old man, who died with progressing signs of heart failure, revealed enlarged heart. The heart is flaccid and its chambers are distended. The myocardium is dull and clay-yellow on section. The endocardium has yellow-white stripes that is especially marked in the papillary muscles. What pathological process is the most likely?
a. Fatty heart
b. Myomalacia
*c. Fatty degeneration of the myocardium
d. Dilated cardiomyopathy
e. Cardiosclerosis
1689. Autopsy of the body of a 62-year-old man, who died with progressing signs of heart failure, revealed enlarged heart. The heart is flaccid and its chambers are distended. The myocardium is dull and clay-yellow on section. The endocardium has yellow-white stripes that is especially marked in the papillary muscles. What pathological process is the most likely?
a. Myomalacia
b. Fatty heart
c. Cardiosclerosis
*d. Fatty degeneration of the myocardium
e. Dilated cardiomyopathy
1690. Autopsy of the body of a deceased 64-year-old woman diagnosed with tuberculosis shows a dense and enlarged spleen with multiple small gray-white foci. Microscopy detects caseous necrosis in the center of the foci, surrounded by epithelioid cells, multinucleated giant cells, lymphocytes, etc. What spleen disorder did this woman develop?
a. Porphyry spleen
b. Sago spleen
c. Lardaceous spleen
*d. Miliary tuberculosis of the spleen
e. Septic spleen
1691. Autopsy of the body of a deceased 64-year-old woman diagnosed with tuberculosis shows a dense and enlarged spleen with multiple small gray-white foci. Microscopy detects caseous necrosis in the center of the foci, surrounded by epithelioid cells, multinucleated giant cells, lymphocytes, etc. What spleen disorder did this woman develop?
a. Porphyry spleen
b. Septic spleen
c. Sago spleen
d. Lardaceous spleen
*e. Miliary tuberculosis of the spleen
1692. Autopsy of the body of a deceased 64-year-old woman diagnosed with tuberculosis shows a dense and enlarged spleen with multiple small gray-white foci. Microscopy detects caseous necrosis in the center of the foci, surrounded by epithelioid cells, multinucleated giant cells, lymphocytes, etc. What spleen disorder did this woman develop?
a. Sago spleen
b. Lardaceous spleen
c. Septic spleen
*d. Miliary tuberculosis of the spleen
e. Porphyry spleen
1693. Autopsy of the body of a man revealed a large wedge-shaped focus of a dark red dense tissue in the upper lobe of the right lung. Histology detected necrosis of the alveolar walls, the lumina of the alveoli were tightly packed with erythrocytes. What process has developed in the lungs?
a. Pulmonary carnification
b. Pulmonary hemorrhage
c. Pulmonary atelectasis
*d. Hemorrhagic pulmonary infarction
e. Pulmonary gangrene
1694. Autopsy of the body of a man revealed a large wedge-shaped focus of a dark red dense tissue in the upper lobe of the right lung. Histology detected necrosis of the alveolar walls, the lumina of the alveoli were tightly packed with erythrocytes. What process has developed in the lungs?
a. Pulmonary gangrene
*b. Hemorrhagic pulmonary infarction
c. Pulmonary carnification
d. Pulmonary hemorrhage
e. Pulmonary atelectasis
1695. Autopsy of the body of a man revealed a large wedge-shaped focus of a dark red dense tissue in the upper lobe of the right lung. Histology detected necrosis of the alveolar walls, the lumina of the alveoli were tightly packed with erythrocytes. What process has developed in the lungs?
a. Pulmonary hemorrhage
b. Pulmonary gangrene
c. Pulmonary carnification
d. Pulmonary atelectasis
*e. Hemorrhagic pulmonary infarction
1696. Autopsy of the body of a man, who died after 3 weeks of pneumonia, shows acutely enlarged lower lobe of his right lung. The lobe is dense, airless, gray, with fibrin deposits on the pleura. Microscopy shows fibrin and segmented leukocytes in all alveoles of this lobe. Make the diagnosis:
*a. Croupous pneumonia
b. Influenza virus pneumonia
c. Interstitial pneumonia
d. Fibrinous pleurisy
e. Focal bronchopneumonia
1697. Autopsy of the body of a man, who died after 3 weeks of pneumonia, shows acutely enlarged lower lobe of his right lung. The lobe is dense, airless, gray, with fibrin deposits on the pleura. Microscopy shows fibrin and segmented leukocytes in all alveoles of this lobe. Make the diagnosis:
a. Focal bronchopneumonia
b. Influenza virus pneumonia
c. Fibrinous pleurisy
*d. Croupous pneumonia
e. Interstitial pneumonia
1698. Autopsy of the body of a man, who died after 3 weeks of pneumonia, shows acutely enlarged lower lobe of his right lung. The lobe is dense, airless, gray, with fibrin deposits on the pleura. Microscopy shows fibrin and segmented leukocytes in all alveoles of this lobe. Make the diagnosis:
a. Influenza virus pneumonia
b. Focal bronchopneumonia
c. Fibrinous pleurisy
d. Interstitial pneumonia
*e. Croupous pneumonia
1699. Autopsy of the body of a man, who died during an abdominal surgery, revealed numerous thrombi in the veins of the lesser pelvis. Clinically, thromboembolic syndrome was detected. Where should the doctor search for the embolus?
a. Brain
b. Veins of the lower extremities
c. Portal vein
d. Left ventricle of heart
*e. Pulmonary arteries
1700. Autopsy of the body of a man, who died during an abdominal surgery, revealed numerous thrombi in the veins of the lesser pelvis. Clinically, thromboembolic syndrome was detected. Where should the doctor search for the embolus?
a. Left ventricle of heart
b. Portal vein
c. Brain
*d. Pulmonary arteries
e. Veins of the lower extremities
1701. Autopsy of the body of a man, who died during an abdominal surgery, revealed numerous thrombi in the veins of the lesser pelvis. Clinically, thromboembolic syndrome was detected. Where should the doctor search for the embolus?
a. Left ventricle of heart
b. Portal vein
c. Veins of the lower extremities
d. Brain
*e. Pulmonary arteries
1702. Autopsy of the body of a patient, who died of cardiovascular failure, shows stenosing coronary atherosclerosis, complicated with thrombosis. Histologically, the thrombus consists of platelets, leukocytes, and fibrin. What type of thrombus can be observed in this case?
a. -
b. Hyaline thrombus
c. Mixed thrombus
d. Red thrombus
*e. White thrombus
1703. Autopsy of the body of a patient, who died of cardiovascular failure, shows stenosing coronary atherosclerosis, complicated with thrombosis. Histologically, the thrombus consists of platelets, leukocytes, and fibrin. What type of thrombus can be observed in this case?
a. Hyaline thrombus
b. Red thrombus
c. Mixed thrombus
*d. White thrombus
e. -
1704. Autopsy of the body of a patient, who died of cardiovascular failure, shows stenosing coronary atherosclerosis, complicated with thrombosis. Histologically, the thrombus consists of platelets, leukocytes, and fibrin. What type of thrombus can be observed in this case?
a. Red thrombus
b. -
c. Hyaline thrombus
d. Mixed thrombus
*e. White thrombus
1705. Autopsy of the body of a woman who died of uremia revealed the kidneys 7x3.5x2 cm in size, with an evenly fine-grained surface and a pale medullary layer thinned down to 0.3 cm. Histology shows sclerosis and hyalinosis of the majority of glomeruli, hyalinosis of the arterioles, sclerosis of artery walls with concentric narrowing of the lumen, and atrophic changes in the tubules. What pathology can be characterized by such macro- and microscopic changes in the kidneys?
*a. Primary contracted kidney
b. Secondary contracted kidney
c. Atherosclerotic nephrosclerosis
d. Pyelonephritic contracted kidney
e. Amyloid contracted kidney
1706. Autopsy of the body of a woman who died of uremia revealed the kidneys 7x3.5x2 cm in size, with an evenly fine-grained surface and a pale medullary layer thinned down to 0.3 cm. Histology shows sclerosis and hyalinosis of the majority of glomeruli, hyalinosis of the arterioles, sclerosis of artery walls with concentric narrowing of the lumen, and atrophic changes in the tubules. What pathology can be characterized by such macro- and microscopic changes in the kidneys?
a. Pyelonephritic contracted kidney
b. Amyloid contracted kidney
c. Secondary contracted kidney
d. Atherosclerotic nephrosclerosis
*e. Primary contracted kidney
1707. Autopsy of the body of a woman who died of uremia revealed the kidneys 7x3.5x2 cm in size, with an evenly fine-grained surface and a pale medullary layer thinned down to 0.3 cm. Histology shows sclerosis and hyalinosis of the majority of glomeruli, hyalinosis of the arterioles, sclerosis of artery walls with concentric narrowing of the lumen, and atrophic changes in the tubules. What pathology can be characterized by such macro- and microscopic changes in the kidneys?
a. Secondary contracted kidney
b. Atherosclerotic nephrosclerosis
*c. Primary contracted kidney
d. Amyloid contracted kidney
e. Pyelonephritic contracted kidney
1708. Autopsy of the body of a woman, who died of acute myocardial infarction, detected a thrombus in a vein of her left shin. Microscopy of the thrombus shows that it is substituted with a connective tissue with diffuse deposits of calcium salts. Name this type of thrombosis outcome:
*a. Petrifaction
b. Organization and canalization
c. Organization
d. Aseptic autolysis
e. Septic autolysis
1709. Autopsy of the body of a woman, who died of acute myocardial infarction, detected a thrombus in a vein of her left shin. Microscopy of the thrombus shows that it is substituted with a connective tissue with diffuse deposits of calcium salts. Name this type of thrombosis outcome:
*a. Petrifaction
b. Septic autolysis
c. Aseptic autolysis
d. Organization and canalization
e. Organization
1710. Autopsy of the body of a woman, who died of acute myocardial infarction, detected a thrombus in a vein of her left shin. Microscopy of the thrombus shows that it is substituted with a connective tissue with diffuse deposits of calcium salts. Name this type of thrombosis outcome:
a. Septic autolysis
b. Organization
c. Organization and canalization
d. Aseptic autolysis
*e. Petrifaction
1711. Bacteria that enter the body are being phagocytized by macrophages. What is the role of macrophages in cooperation of immunocompetent cells during the first phase of immune response?
*a. Ensure antigen processing and presentation to T helper cells
b. Produce immunoglobulins
c. Activate NK cells
d. Ensure antigen processing and presentation to T killer cells
e. Activate T killer cells
1712. Bacteria that enter the body are being phagocytized by macrophages. What is the role of macrophages in cooperation of immunocompetent cells during the first phase of immune response?
a. Ensure antigen processing and presentation to T killer cells
b. Activate T killer cells
*c. Ensure antigen processing and presentation to T helper cells
d. Produce immunoglobulins
e. Activate NK cells
1713. Bacteria that enter the body are being phagocytized by macrophages. What is the role of macrophages in cooperation of immunocompetent cells during the first phase of immune response?
a. Produce immunoglobulins
b. Activate T killer cells
c. Activate NK cells
*d. Ensure antigen processing and presentation to T helper cells
e. Ensure antigen processing and presentation to T killer cells
1714. Bacteriological examination of a group of patients with dental caries detected various microorganisms. What microorganism plays the leading role in caries development in these patients?
a. St. salivarius
b. Borellia buccalis
c. Candida albicans
*d. Streptococcus mutans
e. Staphylococcus aureus
1715. Bacteriological examination of a group of patients with dental caries detected various microorganisms. What microorganism plays the leading role in caries development in these patients?
a. Staphylococcus aureus
*b. Streptococcus mutans
c. Borellia buccalis
d. St. salivarius
e. Candida albicans
1716. Bacteriological examination of a group of patients with dental caries detected various microorganisms. What microorganism plays the leading role in caries development in these patients?
a. Staphylococcus aureus
b. Candida albicans
c. Borellia buccalis
d. St. salivarius
*e. Streptococcus mutans
1717. Bacteriological testing of the stools of a restaurant cook, who had no clinical manifestations of a disease, resulted in growth of small colonies with a metallic sheen on bismuth-sulfite agar. What microorganisms are most likely to form these colonies?
*a. Salmonella
b. Shigella
c. Staphylococci
d. Streptococci
e. Escherichia
1718. Bacteriological testing of the stools of a restaurant cook, who had no clinical manifestations of a disease, resulted in growth of small colonies with a metallic sheen on bismuth-sulfite agar. What microorganisms are most likely to form these colonies?
*a. Salmonella
b. Staphylococci
c. Escherichia
d. Shigella
e. Streptococci
1719. Bacteriological testing of the stools of a restaurant cook, who had no clinical manifestations of a disease, resulted in growth of small colonies with a metallic sheen on bismuth-sulfite agar. What microorganisms are most likely to form these colonies?
*a. Salmonella
b. Staphylococci
c. Escherichia
d. Streptococci
e. Shigella
1720. Bacteriology of dental plaque from the oral cavity of a 10-year-old child detects numerous Streptococcus mutans. This microorganism plays the leading role in the development of:
*a. Caries
b. Vesicular stomatitis
c. Ulcerative gangrenous stomatitis
d. Parodontosis
e. Chronic pulpitis
1721. Bacteriology of dental plaque from the oral cavity of a 10-year-old child detects numerous Streptococcus mutans. This microorganism plays the leading role in the development of:
a. Parodontosis
b. Chronic pulpitis
c. Ulcerative gangrenous stomatitis
d. Vesicular stomatitis
*e. Caries
1722. Bacteriology of dental plaque from the oral cavity of a 10-year-old child detects numerous Streptococcus mutans. This microorganism plays the leading role in the development of:
a. Vesicular stomatitis
*b. Caries
c. Parodontosis
d. Ulcerative gangrenous stomatitis
e. Chronic pulpitis
1723. Bacterioscopy of a swab from the patient's urethra detected gonorrhea. Since fluoroquinolones are the drugs of choice for the treatment of gonorrhea, this patient must be prescribed:
a. Cefazolin
*b. Ciprofloxacin
c. Fluorouracil
d. Furazolidone
e. Urosulfan (Sulfacarbamide)
1724. Bacterioscopy of a swab from the patient's urethra detected gonorrhea. Since fluoroquinolones are the drugs of choice for the treatment of gonorrhea, this patient must be prescribed:
a. Cefazolin
b. Urosulfan (Sulfacarbamide)
c. Furazolidone
*d. Ciprofloxacin
e. Fluorouracil
1725. Bacterioscopy of a swab from the patient's urethra detected gonorrhea. Since fluoroquinolones are the drugs of choice for the treatment of gonorrhea, this patient must be prescribed:
a. Furazolidone
*b. Ciprofloxacin
c. Cefazolin
d. Urosulfan (Sulfacarbamide)
e. Fluorouracil
1726. Basement membrane consisting of three layers is an important component of renal filtration barrier. Its electron-dense middle layer has specialized reticular structure. This membrane is located in:
*a. Renal corpuscle
b. Capillaries of peritubular capillary network
c. Thin tubule
d. Proximal tubule
e. Distal straight tubule
1727. Basement membrane consisting of three layers is an important component of renal filtration barrier. Its electron-dense middle layer has specialized reticular structure. This membrane is located in:
a. Proximal tubule
b. Capillaries of peritubular capillary network
*c. Renal corpuscle
d. Thin tubule
e. Distal straight tubule
1728. Basement membrane consisting of three layers is an important component of renal filtration barrier. Its electron-dense middle layer has specialized reticular structure. This membrane is located in:
a. Thin tubule
b. Distal straight tubule
c. Capillaries of peritubular capillary network
*d. Renal corpuscle
e. Proximal tubule
1729. Because cutaneous leishmaniasis in the urban areas can be characterized by a cyclic course, a physician suspects that the patient has been ill for approximately 3-6 months. What pathological anatomical changes allow making this conclusion, if they appear?
*a. Ulcerative stage
b. Primary leishmanioma
c. Scar stage
d. Nosular stage
e. Tuberculoid form
1730. Because cutaneous leishmaniasis in the urban areas can be characterized by a cyclic course, a physician suspects that the patient has been ill for approximately 3-6 months. What pathological anatomical changes allow making this conclusion, if they appear?
a. Nosular stage
*b. Ulcerative stage
c. Scar stage
d. Tuberculoid form
e. Primary leishmanioma
1731. Because cutaneous leishmaniasis in the urban areas can be characterized by a cyclic course, a physician suspects that the patient has been ill for approximately 3-6 months. What pathological anatomical changes allow making this conclusion, if they appear?
a. Tuberculoid form
b. Nosular stage
c. Primary leishmanioma
d. Scar stage
*e. Ulcerative stage
1732. Because of a trauma, a patient developed a skin defect. To remove the defect, the surgeons replaced this patch of skin with a skin patch taken from other body part of the same patient. What type of transplantation is it?
a. Explantation
b. Allotransplantation
*c. Autotransplantation
d. Xenotransplantation
e. Homotransplantation
1733. Because of a trauma, a patient developed a skin defect. To remove the defect, the surgeons replaced this patch of skin with a skin patch taken from other body part of the same patient. What type of transplantation is it?
a. Explantation
b. Homotransplantation
*c. Autotransplantation
d. Allotransplantation
e. Xenotransplantation
1734. Because of a trauma, a patient developed a skin defect. To remove the defect, the surgeons replaced this patch of skin with a skin patch taken from other body part of the same patient. What type of transplantation is it?
a. Xenotransplantation
*b. Autotransplantation
c. Allotransplantation
d. Explantation
e. Homotransplantation
1735. Because of chondrodysplasia (cartilage maldevelopment), fibrocartilage was damaged. Where can pathologic changes be observed in this case?
a. Bronchi
b. Auricle
*c. Intervertebral disks
d. Larynx
e. Trachea
1736. Because of chondrodysplasia (cartilage maldevelopment), fibrocartilage was damaged. Where can pathologic changes be observed in this case?
a. Bronchi
b. Auricle
c. Trachea
d. Larynx
*e. Intervertebral disks
1737. Because of chondrodysplasia (cartilage maldevelopment), fibrocartilage was damaged. Where can pathologic changes be observed in this case?
a. Bronchi
b. Larynx
*c. Intervertebral disks
d. Auricle
e. Trachea
1738. Before a maxillofacial surgery, the patient received a drug that is a natural anticoagulant that directly affects blood coagulation factors. It is rapidly acting, if administered intravenously. In dental practice, it is used for prevention of thromboembolic complications during extensive maxillofacial surgery. Name this drug:
a. Aminocapronic acid
b. Neodicoumarin
c. Phenylin (Phenindione)
d. Contrykal (Aprotinin)
*e. Heparin
1739. Before a maxillofacial surgery, the patient received a drug that is a natural anticoagulant that directly affects blood coagulation factors. It is rapidly acting, if administered intravenously. In dental practice, it is used for prevention of thromboembolic complications during extensive maxillofacial surgery. Name this drug:
a. Neodicoumarin
b. Contrykal (Aprotinin)
c. Phenylin (Phenindione)
d. Aminocapronic acid
*e. Heparin
1740. Before a maxillofacial surgery, the patient received a drug that is a natural anticoagulant that directly affects blood coagulation factors. It is rapidly acting, if administered intravenously. In dental practice, it is used for prevention of thromboembolic complications during extensive maxillofacial surgery. Name this drug:
a. Phenylin (Phenindione)
*b. Heparin
c. Contrykal (Aprotinin)
d. Neodicoumarin
e. Aminocapronic acid
1741. Before diving underwater, pearl hunters make several deep inhales and exhales. Why do they do it?
*a. For the maximum possible excretion of CO_2 from the body
b. To increase the diffusing capacity of the lungs
c. To increase the blood flow in the  pulmonary circulation
d. To provide the body with oxygen  reserves
e. For the maximum possible excretion of nitrogen from the body
1742. Before diving underwater, pearl hunters make several deep inhales and exhales. Why do they do it?
a. To increase the blood flow in the  pulmonary circulation
b. To provide the body with oxygen  reserves
c. For the maximum possible excretion of nitrogen from the body
*d. For the maximum possible excretion of CO_2 from the body
e. To increase the diffusing capacity of the lungs
1743. Before diving underwater, pearl hunters make several deep inhales and exhales. Why do they do it?
a. To increase the diffusing capacity of the lungs
b. To provide the body with oxygen  reserves
c. To increase the blood flow in the  pulmonary circulation
*d. For the maximum possible excretion of CO_2 from the body
e. For the maximum possible excretion of nitrogen from the body
1744. Before extracting a tooth, the dentist recommended the patient a drug that should be taken to prevent bleeding. Name this drug:
a. Heparin
*b. Vicasol (Menadione)
c. Asparcam (potassium aspartate and magnesium aspartate)
d. Dimedrol (Diphenhydramine)
e. Magnesium sulfate
1745. Before extracting a tooth, the dentist recommended the patient a drug that should be taken to prevent bleeding. Name this drug:
a. Heparin
b. Magnesium sulfate
*c. Vicasol (Menadione)
d. Asparcam (potassium aspartate and magnesium aspartate)
e. Dimedrol (Diphenhydramine)
1746. Before extracting a tooth, the dentist recommended the patient a drug that should be taken to prevent bleeding. Name this drug:
a. Magnesium sulfate
b. Heparin
c. Dimedrol (Diphenhydramine)
*d. Vicasol (Menadione)
e. Asparcam (potassium aspartate and magnesium aspartate)
1747. Before the surgery for realignment of the fractured bone of the upper jaw, the patient received neuroleptanalgesia. Neuroleptic droperidol was administered along with analgesic fentanyl. What type of drug interaction was used?
a. Non-competitive antagonism
b. Competitive antagonism
c. Additive synergism
*d. Potentiated synergism
e. Synergo-antagonism
1748. Before the surgery for realignment of the fractured bone of the upper jaw, the patient received neuroleptanalgesia. Neuroleptic droperidol was administered along with analgesic fentanyl. What type of drug interaction was used?
a. Synergo-antagonism
*b. Potentiated synergism
c. Non-competitive antagonism
d. Competitive antagonism
e. Additive synergism
1749. Beriberi is a classical example of thiamine deficiency. Active form of this vitamin is synthesized by an enzyme belonging to the following group:
a. Hydrolases
b. Isomerase
c. Lyases
d. Oxidoreductases
*e. Transferases
1750. Beriberi is a classical example of thiamine deficiency. Active form of this vitamin is synthesized by an enzyme belonging to the following group:
a. Lyases
b. Isomerase
*c. Transferases
d. Oxidoreductases
e. Hydrolases
1751. Beriberi is a classical example of thiamine deficiency. Active form of this vitamin is synthesized by an enzyme belonging to the following group:
a. Oxidoreductases
b. Hydrolases
*c. Transferases
d. Isomerase
e. Lyases
1752. Biochemical analysis of amino acid contents of freshly synthesized polypeptides shows that in the process of their translation the first amino acid in each of these proteins will be the same. Name this amino acid:
a. Phenylalanine
b. Serine
c. Histidine
d. Isoleucine
*e. Methionine
1753. Biochemical analysis of amino acid contents of freshly synthesized polypeptides shows that in the process of their translation the first amino acid in each of these proteins will be the same. Name this amino acid:
a. Serine
*b. Methionine
c. Histidine
d. Isoleucine
e. Phenylalanine
1754. Biochemical analysis of amino acid contents of freshly synthesized polypeptides shows that in the process of their translation the first amino acid in each of these proteins will be the same. Name this amino acid:
a. Serine
b. Isoleucine
c. Histidine
d. Phenylalanine
*e. Methionine
1755. Biological material taken from a patient contains several species of microorganisms (staphylococci and streptococci) that are causative agents of the patient's disease. Name this type of infection:
*a. Mixed infection
b. Superinfection
c. Reinfection
d. Coinfection
e. Consecutive infection
1756. Biological material taken from a patient contains several species of microorganisms (staphylococci and streptococci) that are causative agents of the patient's disease. Name this type of infection:
a. Coinfection
b. Superinfection
*c. Mixed infection
d. Reinfection
e. Consecutive infection
1757. Biological material taken from a patient contains several species of microorganisms (staphylococci and streptococci) that are causative agents of the patient's disease. Name this type of infection:
a. Consecutive infection
b. Coinfection
*c. Mixed infection
d. Reinfection
e. Superinfection
1758. Biopsy material of oral mucosa demonstrates morphological signs of gums. What structural characteristics of the gingival mucosa can normally be observed?
*a. Tightly attached to the periosteum, lamina propria forms tall papillae, no muscular layer
b. Loosely attached to the periosteum, well-defined muscular layer
c. No lamina propria or muscular layer
d. No muscular layer, well developed submucous layer
e. Contains numerous small salivary glands
1759. Biopsy material of oral mucosa demonstrates morphological signs of gums. What structural characteristics of the gingival mucosa can normally be observed?
*a. Tightly attached to the periosteum, lamina propria forms tall papillae, no muscular layer
b. Loosely attached to the periosteum, well-defined muscular layer
c. No muscular layer, well developed submucous layer
d. Contains numerous small salivary glands
e. No lamina propria or muscular layer
1760. Biopsy material of oral mucosa demonstrates morphological signs of gums. What structural characteristics of the gingival mucosa can normally be observed?
a. No muscular layer, well developed submucous layer
b. Loosely attached to the periosteum, well-defined muscular layer
*c. Tightly attached to the periosteum, lamina propria forms tall papillae, no muscular layer
d. Contains numerous small salivary glands
e. No lamina propria or muscular layer
1761. Blood sample was obtained for analysis. 30% of erythrocytes in the sample are abnormally shaped. Name this phenomenon:
a. Anisocytosis
*b. Pathological poikilocytosis
c. Microcytosis
d. Physiological poikilocytosis
e. Macrocytosis
1762. Blood sample was obtained for analysis. 30% of erythrocytes in the sample are abnormally shaped. Name this phenomenon:
a. Anisocytosis
b. Microcytosis
c. Physiological poikilocytosis
*d. Pathological poikilocytosis
e. Macrocytosis
1763. Blood sample was obtained for analysis. 30% of erythrocytes in the sample are abnormally shaped. Name this phenomenon:
a. Macrocytosis
b. Physiological poikilocytosis
*c. Pathological poikilocytosis
d. Microcytosis
e. Anisocytosis
1764. Blood serum of the patient has milky appearance. Biochemical analysis revealed high content of triacylglycerols and chylomicrons. This condition is caused by hereditary defect of the following enzyme:
*a. Lipoprotein lipase
b. Phosphodiesterase
c. Phospholipase
d. Adipose tissue hormone-sensitive lipase
e. Pancreatic lipase
1765. Blood serum of the patient has milky appearance. Biochemical analysis revealed high content of triacylglycerols and chylomicrons. This condition is caused by hereditary defect of the following enzyme:
a. Phospholipase
b. Adipose tissue hormone-sensitive lipase
*c. Lipoprotein lipase
d. Phosphodiesterase
e. Pancreatic lipase
1766. Blood serum of the patient has milky appearance. Biochemical analysis revealed high content of triacylglycerols and chylomicrons. This condition is caused by hereditary defect of the following enzyme:
a. Phospholipase
b. Pancreatic lipase
*c. Lipoprotein lipase
d. Adipose tissue hormone-sensitive lipase
e. Phosphodiesterase
1767. Blood stains were found on the clothes of a person accused of murder. What reaction can prove that it is human blood?
a. Agglutination test
*b. Precipitation reaction
c. Neutralization reaction
d. Complement fixation test
e. Immunofluorescence assay
1768. Blood stains were found on the clothes of a person accused of murder. What reaction can prove that it is human blood?
a. Immunofluorescence assay
*b. Precipitation reaction
c. Agglutination test
d. Neutralization reaction
e. Complement fixation test
1769. Blood stains were found on the clothes of a person accused of murder. What reaction can prove that it is human blood?
a. Immunofluorescence assay
b. Complement fixation test
c. Agglutination test
*d. Precipitation reaction
e. Neutralization reaction
1770. Blood test for diabetes mellitus shows lactic acid levels of 2.5 mmol/L. What complication is it?
a. Hyperglycemic coma
*b. Lactacidemic coma
c. Hyperketonemic coma
d. Hyperosmolar coma
e. Hypoglycemic coma
1771. Blood test for diabetes mellitus shows lactic acid levels of 2.5 mmol/L. What complication is it?
a. Hyperosmolar coma
b. Hypoglycemic coma
c. Hyperketonemic coma
*d. Lactacidemic coma
e. Hyperglycemic coma
1772. Blood test for diabetes mellitus shows lactic acid levels of 2.5 mmol/L. What complication is it?
a. Hypoglycemic coma
b. Hyperosmolar coma
c. Hyperglycemic coma
d. Hyperketonemic coma
*e. Lactacidemic coma
1773. Breakdown of cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) and cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP) into simple, non-cyclic nucleoside monophosphates is catalyzed by the following enzyme:
a. Adenylate cyclase
*b. Phosphodiesterase
c. Protein kinase
d. Glucose 6-phosphatase
e. Glycogen phosphorylase
1774. Breakdown of cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) and cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP) into simple, non-cyclic nucleoside monophosphates is catalyzed by the following enzyme:
a. Glycogen phosphorylase
b. Protein kinase
c. Adenylate cyclase
*d. Phosphodiesterase
e. Glucose 6-phosphatase
1775. Breakdown of cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) and cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP) into simple, non-cyclic nucleoside monophosphates is catalyzed by the following enzyme:
a. Protein kinase
b. Adenylate cyclase
*c. Phosphodiesterase
d. Glucose 6-phosphatase
e. Glycogen phosphorylase
1776. Broad-spectrum antibiotics can cause various complications, including intestinal candidiasis. What drug is used for treatment of this complication?
*a. Nystatin
b. Amphotericin B
c. Griseofulvin
d. Undecyne
e. Gramicidin
1777. Broad-spectrum antibiotics can cause various complications, including intestinal candidiasis. What drug is used for treatment of this complication?
*a. Nystatin
b. Gramicidin
c. Undecyne
d. Griseofulvin
e. Amphotericin B
1778. Broad-spectrum antibiotics can cause various complications, including intestinal candidiasis. What drug is used for treatment of this complication?
a. Undecyne
b. Gramicidin
*c. Nystatin
d. Amphotericin B
e. Griseofulvin
1779. Cancer cells form in the human body due to the effect of environmental factors. What cells provide antitumor protection?
*a. Lymphocytes
b. Platelets
c. Erythrocytes
d. Neurocytes
e. Epitheliocytes
1780. Cancer cells form in the human body due to the effect of environmental factors. What cells provide antitumor protection?
a. Epitheliocytes
b. Erythrocytes
c. Neurocytes
d. Platelets
*e. Lymphocytes
1781. Cancer cells form in the human body due to the effect of environmental factors. What cells provide antitumor protection?
a. Erythrocytes
*b. Lymphocytes
c. Neurocytes
d. Epitheliocytes
e. Platelets
1782. Cells of basal layer of epidermis were damaged due to exposure to radiation. What function of epidermis will be impaired or inhibited first?
*a. Regenerative
b. Barrier
c. Absorption
d. Dielectric
e. Protective
1783. Cells of basal layer of epidermis were damaged due to exposure to radiation. What function of epidermis will be impaired or inhibited first?
a. Barrier
*b. Regenerative
c. Dielectric
d. Protective
e. Absorption
1784. Cells of basal layer of epidermis were damaged due to exposure to radiation. What function of epidermis will be impaired or inhibited first?
a. Barrier
b. Absorption
*c. Regenerative
d. Dielectric
e. Protective
1785. Cells of sensory spinal ganglions are a part of reflex arches. What type of neurons are these cells?
*a. Pseudounipolar
b. Multipolar
c. Bipolar
d. Unipolar
e. -
1786. Cells of sensory spinal ganglions are a part of reflex arches. What type of neurons are these cells?
*a. Pseudounipolar
b. Unipolar
c. Bipolar
d. -
e. Multipolar
1787. Cells of sensory spinal ganglions are a part of reflex arches. What type of neurons are these cells?
a. Unipolar
b. Bipolar
c. -
d. Multipolar
*e. Pseudounipolar
1788. Chronic inflammation of gingiva resulted in excessive growth of connective tissue fibers. What cell elements are leading in the development of this condition?
a. Fibrocytes
b. Osteoblasts
c. Osteoclasts
*d. Fibroblasts
e. Macrophages
1789. Chronic inflammation of gingiva resulted in excessive growth of connective tissue fibers. What cell elements are leading in the development of this condition?
a. Macrophages
b. Osteoblasts
c. Fibrocytes
d. Osteoclasts
*e. Fibroblasts
1790. Chronic inflammation of gingiva resulted in excessive growth of connective tissue fibers. What cell elements are leading in the development of this condition?
a. Osteoclasts
b. Osteoblasts
c. Macrophages
*d. Fibroblasts
e. Fibrocytes
1791. Chronic overdosage of glucocorticoids leads to the development of hyperglycemia. What process of carbohydrate metabolism is responsible for this effect?
a. Aerobic glycolisis
b. Glycogenesis
*c. Gluconeogenesis
d. Pentose-phosphate cycle
e. Glycogenolysis
1792. Chronic overdosage of glucocorticoids leads to the development of hyperglycemia. What process of carbohydrate metabolism is responsible for this effect?
a. Glycogenesis
b. Pentose-phosphate cycle
*c. Gluconeogenesis
d. Aerobic glycolisis
e. Glycogenolysis
1793. Chronic overdosage of glucocorticoids leads to the development of hyperglycemia. What process of carbohydrate metabolism is responsible for this effect?
a. Pentose-phosphate cycle
b. Glycogenolysis
c. Aerobic glycolisis
d. Glycogenesis
*e. Gluconeogenesis
1794. Combined therapy of chronic heart failure with digitoxin and furosemide resulted in acute muscle weakness in the patient. What electrolyte imbalance can be detected in the patient's blood?
*a. Hypokalemia
b. Hypercalcemia
c. Hyperkalemia
d. -
e. Hypocalcemia
1795. Combined therapy of chronic heart failure with digitoxin and furosemide resulted in acute muscle weakness in the patient. What electrolyte imbalance can be detected in the patient's blood?
*a. Hypokalemia
b. Hypercalcemia
c. Hypocalcemia
d. -
e. Hyperkalemia
1796. Combined therapy of chronic heart failure with digitoxin and furosemide resulted in acute muscle weakness in the patient. What electrolyte imbalance can be detected in the patient's blood?
a. Hypercalcemia
*b. Hypokalemia
c. Hyperkalemia
d. Hypocalcemia
e. -
1797. Complex therapy of a patient with bronchopneumonia accompanied by exhausting dry cough includes a certain mucolytic agent that depolymerizes mucoproteins. Name this drug:
*a. Acetylcysteine
b. Codeine
c. Neodicoumarin
d. Strophanthin
e. Atenolol
1798. Complex therapy of a patient with bronchopneumonia accompanied by exhausting dry cough includes a certain mucolytic agent that depolymerizes mucoproteins. Name this drug:
a. Atenolol
b. Strophanthin
*c. Acetylcysteine
d. Codeine
e. Neodicoumarin
1799. Complex therapy of a patient with bronchopneumonia accompanied by exhausting dry cough includes a certain mucolytic agent that depolymerizes mucoproteins. Name this drug:
a. Neodicoumarin
b. Codeine
c. Strophanthin
*d. Acetylcysteine
e. Atenolol
1800. Condition of a patient with thoracic trauma deteriorates quickly: he  develops increasing asphyxiation, facial pallor, tachycardia. What is the likely cause of these developments?
*a. Pneumothorax
b. Rib fracture
c. Thoracic contusion
d. Fright
e. Response to pain stimulus
1801. Condition of a patient with thoracic trauma deteriorates quickly: he  develops increasing asphyxiation, facial pallor, tachycardia. What is the likely cause of these developments?
a. Fright
b. Rib fracture
c. Thoracic contusion
*d. Pneumothorax
e. Response to pain stimulus
1802. Condition of a patient with thoracic trauma deteriorates quickly: he  develops increasing asphyxiation, facial pallor, tachycardia. What is the likely cause of these developments?
a. Rib fracture
b. Fright
c. Thoracic contusion
d. Response to pain stimulus
*e. Pneumothorax
1803. Contraction of cross-striated muscles is impossible without calcium. What do calcium ions bind to, when forming the actin-myosin cross-bridges?
a. Histamine receptors
b. Cholinergic receptors
*c. Troponin
d. Adrenoceptors
e. Serotonin receptors
1804. Contraction of cross-striated muscles is impossible without calcium. What do calcium ions bind to, when forming the actin-myosin cross-bridges?
a. Histamine receptors
b. Serotonin receptors
*c. Troponin
d. Adrenoceptors
e. Cholinergic receptors
1805. Contraction of cross-striated muscles is impossible without calcium. What do calcium ions bind to, when forming the actin-myosin cross-bridges?
a. Serotonin receptors
*b. Troponin
c. Adrenoceptors
d. Cholinergic receptors
e. Histamine receptors
1806. Contractions of the respiratory muscles completely stop, if:
*a. Spinal cord transection at the level of upper cervical segments
b. Bilateral vagal transection
c. -
d. Spinal cord transection at the level of lower cervical segments
e. Separation of pons cerebelli from medulla oblongata
1807. Contractions of the respiratory muscles completely stop, if:
a. -
*b. Spinal cord transection at the level of upper cervical segments
c. Separation of pons cerebelli from medulla oblongata
d. Bilateral vagal transection
e. Spinal cord transection at the level of lower cervical segments
1808. Contractions of the respiratory muscles completely stop, if:
a. Separation of pons cerebelli from medulla oblongata
b. Bilateral vagal transection
*c. Spinal cord transection at the level of upper cervical segments
d. -
e. Spinal cord transection at the level of lower cervical segments
1809. Correllation between one nerve fiber and all the muscle fibers it innervates is called a motor unit. What body part has the smallest number of muscle fibers innervated by one nerve fiber?
*a. Eye
b. Back
c. Shin
d. Palm
e. Shoulder
1810. Correllation between one nerve fiber and all the muscle fibers it innervates is called a motor unit. What body part has the smallest number of muscle fibers innervated by one nerve fiber?
*a. Eye
b. Shin
c. Palm
d. Shoulder
e. Back
1811. Correllation between one nerve fiber and all the muscle fibers it innervates is called a motor unit. What body part has the smallest number of muscle fibers innervated by one nerve fiber?
a. Back
*b. Eye
c. Shoulder
d. Palm
e. Shin
1812. Curariform drugs are used to immobilize the patient during a surgery. Their mechanism of action is based on the blockade of:
*a. Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors of skeletal muscles
b. Acetylcholine release into the synaptic cleft
c. Muscarinic acetylcholine receptors of smooth muscles
d. Noradrenaline release into the synaptic cleft
e. Conduction of excitation in the nerve fibers
1813. Curariform drugs are used to immobilize the patient during a surgery. Their mechanism of action is based on the blockade of:
*a. Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors of skeletal muscles
b. Noradrenaline release into the synaptic cleft
c. Acetylcholine release into the synaptic cleft
d. Muscarinic acetylcholine receptors of smooth muscles
e. Conduction of excitation in the nerve fibers
1814. Curariform drugs are used to immobilize the patient during a surgery. Their mechanism of action is based on the blockade of:
a. Acetylcholine release into the synaptic cleft
b. Noradrenaline release into the synaptic cleft
c. Conduction of excitation in the nerve fibers
*d. Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors of skeletal muscles
e. Muscarinic acetylcholine receptors of smooth muscles
1815. Deficiency of a certain vitamin can result in a group of symptoms called pellagra. Dermatitis, diarrhea, and dementia are the three main symptoms in such cases. Name the deficient vitamin:
a. Vitamin B_1
b. Vitamin A
c. Vitamin B_2
*d. Vitamin PP
e. Vitamin C
1816. Deficiency of a certain vitamin can result in a group of symptoms called pellagra. Dermatitis, diarrhea, and dementia are the three main symptoms in such cases. Name the deficient vitamin:
a. Vitamin B_1
b. Vitamin B_2
c. Vitamin A
d. Vitamin C
*e. Vitamin PP
1817. Deficiency of a certain vitamin can result in a group of symptoms called pellagra. Dermatitis, diarrhea, and dementia are the three main symptoms in such cases. Name the deficient vitamin:
a. Vitamin B_1
b. Vitamin C
c. Vitamin A
*d. Vitamin PP
e. Vitamin B_2
1818. Degenerative changes resulted in formation of mineralized foci in the tongue pulp. Some of these foci contain canaliculi. Name these formations:
a. Bone tissue
*b. Denticles
c. Fibrous bodies
d. Ossification patches
e. Cement
1819. Degenerative changes resulted in formation of mineralized foci in the tongue pulp. Some of these foci contain canaliculi. Name these formations:
a. Fibrous bodies
b. Ossification patches
c. Cement
*d. Denticles
e. Bone tissue
1820. Degenerative changes resulted in formation of mineralized foci in the tongue pulp. Some of these foci contain canaliculi. Name these formations:
a. Ossification patches
b. Fibrous bodies
c. Bone tissue
*d. Denticles
e. Cement
1821. Dental implants were installed in a patient. Three weeks later, implant rejection occurred. What blood cells play the largest role in this pathological process?
a. B lymphocytes
b. Plasmacytes
*c. T lymphocytes
d. Immunoglobulins E
e. Immunoglobulins M
1822. Dental implants were installed in a patient. Three weeks later, implant rejection occurred. What blood cells play the largest role in this pathological process?
a. Immunoglobulins E
b. B lymphocytes
c. Plasmacytes
d. Immunoglobulins M
*e. T lymphocytes
1823. Dental implants were installed in a patient. Three weeks later, implant rejection occurred. What blood cells play the largest role in this pathological process?
a. Plasmacytes
*b. T lymphocytes
c. B lymphocytes
d. Immunoglobulins E
e. Immunoglobulins M
1824. Dentists have high risk of contracting viral hepatitis type B in the course of their duties and therefore are subject to mandatory vaccination. What vaccine is used in such cases?
a. Inactivated vaccine
*b. Recombinant vaccine
c. Live vaccine
d. Anatoxin
e. Chemical vaccine
1825. Dentists have high risk of contracting viral hepatitis type B in the course of their duties and therefore are subject to mandatory vaccination. What vaccine is used in such cases?
a. Inactivated vaccine
b. Live vaccine
c. Anatoxin
d. Chemical vaccine
*e. Recombinant vaccine
1826. Dentists have high risk of contracting viral hepatitis type B in the course of their duties and therefore are subject to mandatory vaccination. What vaccine is used in such cases?
a. Live vaccine
*b. Recombinant vaccine
c. Chemical vaccine
d. Inactivated vaccine
e. Anatoxin
1827. Dependence of blood pressure from vascular resistance was studied in an experiment on a test animal. In what vessel will the resistance be the highest?
*a. Arterioles
b. Veins
c. Capillaries
d. Aorta
e. Arteries
1828. Dependence of blood pressure from vascular resistance was studied in an experiment on a test animal. In what vessel will the resistance be the highest?
a. Aorta
b. Arteries
c. Capillaries
*d. Arterioles
e. Veins
1829. Dependence of blood pressure from vascular resistance was studied in an experiment on a test animal. In what vessel will the resistance be the highest?
a. Arteries
*b. Arterioles
c. Veins
d. Aorta
e. Capillaries
1830. Detoxification of bilirubin occurs in the membranes of endoplasmic reticulum of hepatocytes. Bilirubin is secreted by hepatocytes into bile for the most part as:
*a. Bilirubin diglucuronide
b. Unconjugated bilirubin
c. Indirect reacting bilirubin
d. Bilirubin monoglucuronide
e. -
1831. Detoxification of bilirubin occurs in the membranes of endoplasmic reticulum of hepatocytes. Bilirubin is secreted by hepatocytes into bile for the most part as:
a. -
*b. Bilirubin diglucuronide
c. Indirect reacting bilirubin
d. Bilirubin monoglucuronide
e. Unconjugated bilirubin
1832. Detoxification of bilirubin occurs in the membranes of endoplasmic reticulum of hepatocytes. Bilirubin is secreted by hepatocytes into bile for the most part as:
a. -
b. Bilirubin monoglucuronide
c. Indirect reacting bilirubin
d. Unconjugated bilirubin
*e. Bilirubin diglucuronide
1833. Differentiation of B-lymphocytes into plasma cells leads to synthesis of immunoglobulins that ensure specific immune response of the body. Differentiation of B-lymphocytes takes place in the following organ of immune system:
*a. Tonsils
b. Red bone marrow
c. Thyroid gland
d. Liver
e. Thymus
1834. Differentiation of B-lymphocytes into plasma cells leads to synthesis of immunoglobulins that ensure specific immune response of the body. Differentiation of B-lymphocytes takes place in the following organ of immune system:
a. Thymus
*b. Tonsils
c. Red bone marrow
d. Thyroid gland
e. Liver
1835. Differentiation of B-lymphocytes into plasma cells leads to synthesis of immunoglobulins that ensure specific immune response of the body. Differentiation of B-lymphocytes takes place in the following organ of immune system:
a. Thyroid gland
b. Thymus
c. Red bone marrow
d. Liver
*e. Tonsils
1836. Disturbed auditory function can be caused by changes in the structure of the receptor cells of spiral organ of Corti. What cells are affected in such cases?
*a. Hair cells
b. Marginal cells
c. Pillars
d. Supporting cells
e. Phalangeal cells
1837. Disturbed auditory function can be caused by changes in the structure of the receptor cells of spiral organ of Corti. What cells are affected in such cases?
a. Marginal cells
*b. Hair cells
c. Pillars
d. Supporting cells
e. Phalangeal cells
1838. Disturbed auditory function can be caused by changes in the structure of the receptor cells of spiral organ of Corti. What cells are affected in such cases?
a. Phalangeal cells
*b. Hair cells
c. Pillars
d. Marginal cells
e. Supporting cells
1839. Disturbed endoderm differentiation was detected in an embryo material. This process can lead to developmental changes in the following organs:
a. Aorta
*b. Stomach
c. Heart
d. Salivary glands
e. Kidneys
1840. Disturbed endoderm differentiation was detected in an embryo material. This process can lead to developmental changes in the following organs:
a. Aorta
b. Heart
*c. Stomach
d. Kidneys
e. Salivary glands
1841. Disturbed endoderm differentiation was detected in an embryo material. This process can lead to developmental changes in the following organs:
a. Kidneys
*b. Stomach
c. Aorta
d. Heart
e. Salivary glands
1842. Dopamine precursor - dioxyphenylalanine (DOPA) - is used in treatment of Parkinson's disease. This active substance is produced from the following amino acid:
a. Alanine
b. Cysteine
*c. Tyrosine
d. Histidine
e. Tryptophan
1843. Dopamine precursor - dioxyphenylalanine (DOPA) - is used in treatment of Parkinson's disease. This active substance is produced from the following amino acid:
a. Alanine
b. Cysteine
c. Tryptophan
d. Histidine
*e. Tyrosine
1844. Dopamine precursor - dioxyphenylalanine (DOPA) - is used in treatment of Parkinson's disease. This active substance is produced from the following amino acid:
a. Tryptophan
*b. Tyrosine
c. Alanine
d. Histidine
e. Cysteine
1845. Due to an accident on board a nuclear submarine, a soldier received a radiation dose of 5 Gy. He complains of headache, nausea, and vertigo. What changes in leukocyte number can be observed in this soldier after the irradiation?
a. Agranulocytosis
*b. Neutrophilic leukocytosis
c. Lymphocytosis
d. Leukopenia
e. Eosinophilia
1846. Due to an accident on board a nuclear submarine, a soldier received a radiation dose of 5 Gy. He complains of headache, nausea, and vertigo. What changes in leukocyte number can be observed in this soldier after the irradiation?
a. Eosinophilia
b. Agranulocytosis
c. Leukopenia
d. Lymphocytosis
*e. Neutrophilic leukocytosis
1847. Due to an accident on board a nuclear submarine, a soldier received a radiation dose of 5 Gy. He complains of headache, nausea, and vertigo. What changes in leukocyte number can be observed in this soldier after the irradiation?
a. Eosinophilia
b. Agranulocytosis
c. Lymphocytosis
*d. Neutrophilic leukocytosis
e. Leukopenia
1848. Due to severe pain syndrome a patient has been prescribed a narcotic analgesic. Specify the prescribed drug:
a. Analgin (Metamizole)
b. Dimexid
c. Indometacin
*d. Morphine
e. Nimesulid
1849. Due to severe pain syndrome a patient has been prescribed a narcotic analgesic. Specify the prescribed drug:
a. Dimexid
*b. Morphine
c. Analgin (Metamizole)
d. Indometacin
e. Nimesulid
1850. Due to severe pain syndrome a patient has been prescribed a narcotic analgesic. Specify the prescribed drug:
a. Nimesulid
b. Analgin (Metamizole)
*c. Morphine
d. Indometacin
e. Dimexid
1851. Due to sustained trauma the patient presents with unevenly dilated pupils (anisocoria). What muscle is blocked?
a. Musculus ciliaris
*b. Musculus sphincter pupillae
c. Musculus rectus inferior
d. Musculus rectus lateralis
e. Musculus rectus superior
1852. Due to sustained trauma the patient presents with unevenly dilated pupils (anisocoria). What muscle is blocked?
a. Musculus ciliaris
b. Musculus rectus lateralis
c. Musculus rectus inferior
*d. Musculus sphincter pupillae
e. Musculus rectus superior
1853. Due to sustained trauma the patient presents with unevenly dilated pupils (anisocoria). What muscle is blocked?
a. Musculus ciliaris
b. Musculus rectus superior
*c. Musculus sphincter pupillae
d. Musculus rectus lateralis
e. Musculus rectus inferior
1854. Due to trauma the patient's parathyroid glands have been removed, which resulted in inertness, thirst, sharp increase of neuromuscular excitability. Metabolism of the following substance is disturbed:
*a. Calcium
b. Chlorine
c. Zinc
d. Manganese
e. Molybdenum
1855. Due to trauma the patient's parathyroid glands have been removed, which resulted in inertness, thirst, sharp increase of neuromuscular excitability. Metabolism of the following substance is disturbed:
a. Molybdenum
b. Chlorine
c. Manganese
*d. Calcium
e. Zinc
1856. Due to trauma the patient's parathyroid glands have been removed, which resulted in inertness, thirst, sharp increase of neuromuscular excitability. Metabolism of the following substance is disturbed:
a. Molybdenum
b. Zinc
*c. Calcium
d. Manganese
e. Chlorine
1857. During DNA sequencing and biochemical analysis of a polypeptide, it was determined that the linear sequence of nucleotide triplets corresponds with the amino acid sequence in the polypeptide chain. What characteristic of the genetic code was determined?
a. Degeneracy
b. Triplet nature
*c. Collinearity
d. Nonoverlapping
e. Universality
1858. During DNA sequencing and biochemical analysis of a polypeptide, it was determined that the linear sequence of nucleotide triplets corresponds with the amino acid sequence in the polypeptide chain. What characteristic of the genetic code was determined?
a. Degeneracy
b. Universality
c. Nonoverlapping
*d. Collinearity
e. Triplet nature
1859. During DNA sequencing and biochemical analysis of a polypeptide, it was determined that the linear sequence of nucleotide triplets corresponds with the amino acid sequence in the polypeptide chain. What characteristic of the genetic code was determined?
a. Nonoverlapping
b. Universality
c. Degeneracy
d. Triplet nature
*e. Collinearity
1860. During a brain surgery stimulation of the cerebral cortex resulted in tactile and thermal sensations in the patient. What gyrus was stimulated?
*a. Postcentral gyrus
b. Parahippocampal gyrus
c. Precentral gyrus
d. Superior temporal gyrus
e. Cingulate convolution
1861. During a brain surgery stimulation of the cerebral cortex resulted in tactile and thermal sensations in the patient. What gyrus was stimulated?
a. Precentral gyrus
b. Parahippocampal gyrus
c. Superior temporal gyrus
d. Cingulate convolution
*e. Postcentral gyrus
1862. During a brain surgery stimulation of the cerebral cortex resulted in tactile and thermal sensations in the patient. What gyrus was stimulated?
a. Superior temporal gyrus
b. Cingulate convolution
c. Precentral gyrus
d. Parahippocampal gyrus
*e. Postcentral gyrus
1863. During a car accident, a person received a strong blow to the epigastric region, which caused a cardiac arrest. What was the likely cause of such changes in the cardiac activity?
*a. Increased vagal tone
b. Adrenaline production
c. Increased tone of the sympathetic nervous system
d. Cortisol production
e. Aldosterone production
1864. During a car accident, a person received a strong blow to the epigastric region, which caused a cardiac arrest. What was the likely cause of such changes in the cardiac activity?
a. Cortisol production
b. Increased tone of the sympathetic nervous system
*c. Increased vagal tone
d. Aldosterone production
e. Adrenaline production
1865. During a car accident, a person received a strong blow to the epigastric region, which caused a cardiac arrest. What was the likely cause of such changes in the cardiac activity?
a. Increased tone of the sympathetic nervous system
b. Cortisol production
c. Adrenaline production
d. Aldosterone production
*e. Increased vagal tone
1866. During a class in molecular biology, the mutations resulting in production of abnormal hemoglobin are being studied. What amino acid substitution occurs when S-hemoglobin is being produced, resulting in the development of sickle-cell anemia?
*a. Glutamic acid is substituted with valine
b. Lysine is substituted with glutamine
c. Histidine is substituted with arginine
d. Glycine is substituted with asparagine
e. Threonine is substituted with lysine
1867. During a class in molecular biology, the mutations resulting in production of abnormal hemoglobin are being studied. What amino acid substitution occurs when S-hemoglobin is being produced, resulting in the development of sickle-cell anemia?
a. Glycine is substituted with asparagine
b. Histidine is substituted with arginine
*c. Glutamic acid is substituted with valine
d. Threonine is substituted with lysine
e. Lysine is substituted with glutamine
1868. During a class in molecular biology, the mutations resulting in production of abnormal hemoglobin are being studied. What amino acid substitution occurs when S-hemoglobin is being produced, resulting in the development of sickle-cell anemia?
a. Histidine is substituted with arginine
*b. Glutamic acid is substituted with valine
c. Glycine is substituted with asparagine
d. Threonine is substituted with lysine
e. Lysine is substituted with glutamine
1869. During a dental manipulation, the patient developed an angina pectoris attack. What group of drugs needs to be prescribed for the emergency aid in this case?
a. Antihypertensive drugs
b. Antiarrhythmic drugs
c. Cardiotonics
d. Respiratory stimulants
*e. Antianginal drugs
1870. During a dental manipulation, the patient developed an angina pectoris attack. What group of drugs needs to be prescribed for the emergency aid in this case?
a. Respiratory stimulants
b. Antiarrhythmic drugs
*c. Antianginal drugs
d. Antihypertensive drugs
e. Cardiotonics
1871. During a dental manipulation, the patient developed an angina pectoris attack. What group of drugs needs to be prescribed for the emergency aid in this case?
a. Respiratory stimulants
b. Antiarrhythmic drugs
c. Cardiotonics
d. Antihypertensive drugs
*e. Antianginal drugs
1872. During a neck surgery, the patient's sternothyroid muscle was damaged by the surgeon. What function will be impaired because of the damage to this muscle?
a. Bending the neck forwards
b. Raising of the larynx
c. Raising of the hyoid bone
d. Neck extension
*e. Lowering of the larynx
1873. During a neck surgery, the patient's sternothyroid muscle was damaged by the surgeon. What function will be impaired because of the damage to this muscle?
a. Neck extension
b. Raising of the larynx
*c. Lowering of the larynx
d. Bending the neck forwards
e. Raising of the hyoid bone
1874. During a neck surgery, the patient's sternothyroid muscle was damaged by the surgeon. What function will be impaired because of the damage to this muscle?
a. Raising of the larynx
b. Neck extension
c. Raising of the hyoid bone
d. Bending the neck forwards
*e. Lowering of the larynx
1875. During a preventive examination, microbial cysts with eight nuclei were detected in the feces of a cafeteria worker. These cysts belong to the following protozoa:
a. Lamblia
b. Toxoplasma
*c. Entamoeba histolytica
d. Balantidium
e. Pentatrichomonas hominis
1876. During a preventive examination, microbial cysts with eight nuclei were detected in the feces of a cafeteria worker. These cysts belong to the following protozoa:
a. Lamblia
b. Toxoplasma
c. Pentatrichomonas hominis
*d. Entamoeba histolytica
e. Balantidium
1877. During a preventive examination, microbial cysts with eight nuclei were detected in the feces of a cafeteria worker. These cysts belong to the following protozoa:
a. Toxoplasma
b. Lamblia
c. Pentatrichomonas hominis
*d. Entamoeba histolytica
e. Balantidium
1878. During a prolonged starvation, glucocorticoid secretion by the adrenal cortex increases. Glucocorticoids increase the synthesis of gluconeogenetic enzymes in the liver. Name the terminal enzyme of this process:
*a. Glucose-6-phosphatase
b. Glucose-1-phosphatase
c. Fructose-6-phosphatase
d. Fructose-2,6-bisphosphatase
e. Fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase
1879. During a prolonged starvation, glucocorticoid secretion by the adrenal cortex increases. Glucocorticoids increase the synthesis of gluconeogenetic enzymes in the liver. Name the terminal enzyme of this process:
a. Fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase
b. Glucose-1-phosphatase
c. Fructose-2,6-bisphosphatase
*d. Glucose-6-phosphatase
e. Fructose-6-phosphatase
1880. During a prolonged starvation, glucocorticoid secretion by the adrenal cortex increases. Glucocorticoids increase the synthesis of gluconeogenetic enzymes in the liver. Name the terminal enzyme of this process:
a. Glucose-1-phosphatase
b. Fructose-2,6-bisphosphatase
*c. Glucose-6-phosphatase
d. Fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase
e. Fructose-6-phosphatase
1881. During a regular check-up with the dentist, a patient diagnosed with chronic gingivitis presents with no inflammatory changes in the gingival mucosa. This condition of the patient can be characterized as:
a. Complication
b. Recurrence
c. Pathologic process
*d. Remission
e. Pathologic reaction
1882. During a regular check-up with the dentist, a patient diagnosed with chronic gingivitis presents with no inflammatory changes in the gingival mucosa. This condition of the patient can be characterized as:
a. Pathologic process
*b. Remission
c. Pathologic reaction
d. Recurrence
e. Complication
1883. During a regular check-up with the dentist, a patient diagnosed with chronic gingivitis presents with no inflammatory changes in the gingival mucosa. This condition of the patient can be characterized as:
a. Recurrence
b. Pathologic reaction
c. Complication
d. Pathologic process
*e. Remission
1884. During a regular examination of a 2-year-old child, the doctor noted that the child's anterior fontanelle is open. At what age does it close?
*a. During the second year of life
b. At the age of 1--2 months
c. At the age of 6-9 months
d. At the age of 3 months
e. During the first year of life
1885. During a regular examination of a 2-year-old child, the doctor noted that the child's anterior fontanelle is open. At what age does it close?
a. At the age of 1--2 months
*b. During the second year of life
c. At the age of 3 months
d. At the age of 6-9 months
e. During the first year of life
1886. During a regular examination of a 2-year-old child, the doctor noted that the child's anterior fontanelle is open. At what age does it close?
a. At the age of 1--2 months
b. During the first year of life
*c. During the second year of life
d. At the age of 3 months
e. At the age of 6-9 months
1887. During a sea trip, a man developed signs of motion sickness: pallor, sweating, dizziness, nausea, rapid breathing, and decreased blood pressure. What causes this condition in this case?
a. Discoordination between the visual and motor systems
b. Overstimulation of the visceroreceptors in the abdominal cavity
c. Activation of the parasympathetic part of the autonomic nervous system
*d. Overstimulation of the vestibular apparatus
e. Activation of the sympathetic part of the autonomic nervous system
1888. During a sea trip, a man developed signs of motion sickness: pallor, sweating, dizziness, nausea, rapid breathing, and decreased blood pressure. What causes this condition in this case?
a. Overstimulation of the visceroreceptors in the abdominal cavity
b. Discoordination between the visual and motor systems
*c. Overstimulation of the vestibular apparatus
d. Activation of the sympathetic part of the autonomic nervous system
e. Activation of the parasympathetic part of the autonomic nervous system
1889. During a sea trip, a man developed signs of motion sickness: pallor, sweating, dizziness, nausea, rapid breathing, and decreased blood pressure. What causes this condition in this case?
a. Overstimulation of the visceroreceptors in the abdominal cavity
b. Discoordination between the visual and motor systems
c. Activation of the sympathetic part of the autonomic nervous system
d. Activation of the parasympathetic part of the autonomic nervous system
*e. Overstimulation of the vestibular apparatus
1890. During a spinal surgery, the patient's vertebral arches and their connecting ligaments were removed. Name these ligaments:
a. -
b. Posterior longitudinal ligament
c. Interspinous ligaments
d. Anterior longitudinal ligament
*e. Yellow ligaments
1891. During a spinal surgery, the patient's vertebral arches and their connecting ligaments were removed. Name these ligaments:
a. Anterior longitudinal ligament
*b. Yellow ligaments
c. -
d. Posterior longitudinal ligament
e. Interspinous ligaments
1892. During a spinal surgery, the patient's vertebral arches and their connecting ligaments were removed. Name these ligaments:
a. Posterior longitudinal ligament
b. Interspinous ligaments
*c. Yellow ligaments
d. -
e. Anterior longitudinal ligament
1893. During a surgery on the oral diaphragm, a surgeon needs to locate an area that is called a ''submandibular triangle''. What muscle bounds this area?
*a. M. digastricus
b. M. geniohyoideus
c. -
d. M. hyoglossus
e. M. stylohyoideus
1894. During a surgery on the oral diaphragm, a surgeon needs to locate an area that is called a ''submandibular triangle''. What muscle bounds this area?
*a. M. digastricus
b. M. stylohyoideus
c. -
d. M. hyoglossus
e. M. geniohyoideus
1895. During a surgery on the oral diaphragm, a surgeon needs to locate an area that is called a ''submandibular triangle''. What muscle bounds this area?
a. M. hyoglossus
*b. M. digastricus
c. M. geniohyoideus
d. M. stylohyoideus
e. -
1896. During a surgery on the parotid gland, the surgeon ligated a vein passing through the center of this gland. Name this vein:
a. V. facialis
*b. V. retromandibularis
c. Vv. pharyngeae
d. V. lingualis
e. Vv. thyroideae superiores
1897. During a surgery on the parotid gland, the surgeon ligated a vein passing through the center of this gland. Name this vein:
a. V. lingualis
b. Vv. pharyngeae
c. V. facialis
d. Vv. thyroideae superiores
*e. V. retromandibularis
1898. During a surgery on the parotid gland, the surgeon ligated a vein passing through the center of this gland. Name this vein:
a. Vv. thyroideae superiores
b. V. facialis
c. Vv. pharyngeae
*d. V. retromandibularis
e. V. lingualis
1899. During a surgery on the right side of the neck, excursion of the right diaphragmatic dome was disturbed. This disturbance occurred because of the damage to the following nerve:
a. Left phrenic nerve
b. Supraclavicular nerve
*c. Right phrenic nerve
d. Right transverse cervical nerve
e. Left transverse cervical nerve
1900. During a surgery on the right side of the neck, excursion of the right diaphragmatic dome was disturbed. This disturbance occurred because of the damage to the following nerve:
a. Left transverse cervical nerve
b. Right transverse cervical nerve
c. Left phrenic nerve
d. Supraclavicular nerve
*e. Right phrenic nerve
1901. During a surgery on the right side of the neck, excursion of the right diaphragmatic dome was disturbed. This disturbance occurred because of the damage to the following nerve:
a. Supraclavicular nerve
b. Left phrenic nerve
c. Left transverse cervical nerve
d. Right transverse cervical nerve
*e. Right phrenic nerve
1902. During a surgery, a patient with acute appendicitis developed a cardiac arrest. What signs are characteristic of clinical death?
a. Apneustic respiration, no cardiac activity
b. Rapid respiration, weak heart sounds
c. No respiration, thready pulse
*d. No respiration, no cardiac activity
e. Kussmaul respiration, no cardiac activity
1903. During a surgery, a patient with acute appendicitis developed a cardiac arrest. What signs are characteristic of clinical death?
a. No respiration, thready pulse
*b. No respiration, no cardiac activity
c. Kussmaul respiration, no cardiac activity
d. Rapid respiration, weak heart sounds
e. Apneustic respiration, no cardiac activity
1904. During a surgery, a patient with acute appendicitis developed a cardiac arrest. What signs are characteristic of clinical death?
a. Rapid respiration, weak heart sounds
b. No respiration, thready pulse
*c. No respiration, no cardiac activity
d. Kussmaul respiration, no cardiac activity
e. Apneustic respiration, no cardiac activity
1905. During a visit to a dentist, the patient's oral mucosa is bright red. The patient has angular stomatitis and cheilosis. What vitamin deficiency is observed in this case?
a. 6
b. 
*c. 2
d. 5
e. 1
1906. During a visit to a dentist, the patient's oral mucosa is bright red. The patient has angular stomatitis and cheilosis. What vitamin deficiency is observed in this case?
a. 6
b. 
c. 1
d. 5
*e. 2
1907. During a visit to a dentist, the patient's oral mucosa is bright red. The patient has angular stomatitis and cheilosis. What vitamin deficiency is observed in this case?
a. 
*b. 2
c. 1
d. 6
e. 5
1908. During a visit to the dentist, the patient developed bronchospasm. What medicine must be used in this case?
*a. Salbutamol
b. Atenolol
c. Naphthyzin (Naphazoline)
d. Analgin (Metamizole)
e. Anaprilin (Propranolol)
1909. During a visit to the dentist, the patient developed bronchospasm. What medicine must be used in this case?
a. Analgin (Metamizole)
*b. Salbutamol
c. Atenolol
d. Naphthyzin (Naphazoline)
e. Anaprilin (Propranolol)
1910. During a visit to the dentist, the patient developed bronchospasm. What medicine must be used in this case?
a. Anaprilin (Propranolol)
b. Analgin (Metamizole)
c. Naphthyzin (Naphazoline)
*d. Salbutamol
e. Atenolol
1911. During acute inflammation of parotid gland, there is damage to the cells of secretory segments observed. What cells are damaged in this case?
a. Seromucous cells
b. Serous cells, cells with basal striation, stellate cells
*c. Serous cells, myoepithelial cells
d. Brush-bordered epithelial cells, cells with basal striation
e. Albuminous cells, serous cells, mucous cells
1912. During acute inflammation of parotid gland, there is damage to the cells of secretory segments observed. What cells are damaged in this case?
a. Serous cells, cells with basal striation, stellate cells
*b. Serous cells, myoepithelial cells
c. Albuminous cells, serous cells, mucous cells
d. Brush-bordered epithelial cells, cells with basal striation
e. Seromucous cells
1913. During acute inflammation of parotid gland, there is damage to the cells of secretory segments observed. What cells are damaged in this case?
a. Serous cells, cells with basal striation, stellate cells
b. Seromucous cells
c. Brush-bordered epithelial cells, cells with basal striation
*d. Serous cells, myoepithelial cells
e. Albuminous cells, serous cells, mucous cells
1914. During an abdominal surgery, the patient developed a reflex cardiac arrest. Name the location of this reflex center:
*a. Medulla oblongata
b. Cerebral cortex
c. Spinal cord
d. Midbrain
e. Diencephalon
1915. During an abdominal surgery, the patient developed a reflex cardiac arrest. Name the location of this reflex center:
a. Midbrain
*b. Medulla oblongata
c. Cerebral cortex
d. Diencephalon
e. Spinal cord
1916. During an abdominal surgery, the patient developed a reflex cardiac arrest. Name the location of this reflex center:
a. Midbrain
b. Spinal cord
c. Cerebral cortex
d. Diencephalon
*e. Medulla oblongata
1917. During an appointment with the dentist, a patient developed a bronchial asthma attack. What does this patient need to be prescribed to terminate the bronchospasm?
a. Benzohexonium (Hexamethonium bromide)
b. Methacin (Metocinium iodide)
c. Droperidol
d. Anaprilin (Propranolol)
*e. Salbutamol
1918. During an appointment with the dentist, a patient developed a bronchial asthma attack. What does this patient need to be prescribed to terminate the bronchospasm?
a. Methacin (Metocinium iodide)
*b. Salbutamol
c. Anaprilin (Propranolol)
d. Benzohexonium (Hexamethonium bromide)
e. Droperidol
1919. During an appointment with the dentist, a patient developed a bronchial asthma attack. What does this patient need to be prescribed to terminate the bronchospasm?
a. Methacin (Metocinium iodide)
b. Benzohexonium (Hexamethonium bromide)
c. Droperidol
d. Anaprilin (Propranolol)
*e. Salbutamol
1920. During an appointment with the dentist, a patient developed hypersalivation. What group of drugs can decrease this phenomenon?
a. Astringent agents
*b. Cholinergic antagonists
c. Cholinergic agonists
d. Adrenergic antagonist
e. Adrenergic agonist
1921. During an appointment with the dentist, a patient developed hypersalivation. What group of drugs can decrease this phenomenon?
a. Cholinergic agonists
*b. Cholinergic antagonists
c. Adrenergic agonist
d. Adrenergic antagonist
e. Astringent agents
1922. During an appointment with the dentist, a patient developed hypersalivation. What group of drugs can decrease this phenomenon?
a. Cholinergic agonists
*b. Cholinergic antagonists
c. Adrenergic antagonist
d. Adrenergic agonist
e. Astringent agents
1923. During an appointment, a patient developed atrioventricular block. What medicinal substance can be used as an emergency aid in this case?
a. Anaprilin (Propranolol)
b. Atenolol
c. Pirenzepine
*d. Atropine
e. Platyphyllin
1924. During an appointment, a patient developed atrioventricular block. What medicinal substance can be used as an emergency aid in this case?
a. Platyphyllin
*b. Atropine
c. Anaprilin (Propranolol)
d. Pirenzepine
e. Atenolol
1925. During an appointment, a patient developed atrioventricular block. What medicinal substance can be used as an emergency aid in this case?
a. Platyphyllin
b. Anaprilin (Propranolol)
*c. Atropine
d. Pirenzepine
e. Atenolol
1926. During an exacerbation of rheumatoid arthritis, the patient with a history of concomitant chronic gastritis was prescribed celecoxib. What decreases the digestive tract side effects of this drug?
a. Phospholipase A2 inhibition
*b. Predominant inhibition of cyclooxygenase-2
c. Phosphodiesterase inhibition
d. Predominant inhibition of cyclooxygenase-1
e. Predominant stimulation of adenylate cyclase
1927. During an exacerbation of rheumatoid arthritis, the patient with a history of concomitant chronic gastritis was prescribed celecoxib. What decreases the digestive tract side effects of this drug?
a. Predominant inhibition of cyclooxygenase-1
b. Predominant stimulation of adenylate cyclase
*c. Predominant inhibition of cyclooxygenase-2
d. Phospholipase A2 inhibition
e. Phosphodiesterase inhibition
1928. During an exacerbation of rheumatoid arthritis, the patient with a history of concomitant chronic gastritis was prescribed celecoxib. What decreases the digestive tract side effects of this drug?
a. Predominant stimulation of adenylate cyclase
*b. Predominant inhibition of cyclooxygenase-2
c. Phosphodiesterase inhibition
d. Predominant inhibition of cyclooxygenase-1
e. Phospholipase A2 inhibition
1929. During an outbreak of a hospital-acquired infection, pure cultures of S. aureus were grown after inoculation of the samples obtained from the nasopharynxes of the medical personnel and from wound drainage of the surgical patients. What tests are necessary to determine the likely source of infection?
*a. Phage typing of the obtained cultures
b. Antibiotic sensitivity testing
c. Repeated inoculations
d. Biochemical profiles
e. Sero-identification
1930. During an outbreak of a hospital-acquired infection, pure cultures of S. aureus were grown after inoculation of the samples obtained from the nasopharynxes of the medical personnel and from wound drainage of the surgical patients. What tests are necessary to determine the likely source of infection?
*a. Phage typing of the obtained cultures
b. Sero-identification
c. Biochemical profiles
d. Antibiotic sensitivity testing
e. Repeated inoculations
1931. During an outbreak of a hospital-acquired infection, pure cultures of S. aureus were grown after inoculation of the samples obtained from the nasopharynxes of the medical personnel and from wound drainage of the surgical patients. What tests are necessary to determine the likely source of infection?
a. Antibiotic sensitivity testing
b. Repeated inoculations
*c. Phage typing of the obtained cultures
d. Sero-identification
e. Biochemical profiles
1932. During analysis of a blood sample, the laboratory assistant additionally noted that this sample belongs to a female patient. Such conclusion can be made based on the stuctural characteristics of certain blood corpuscles. Name this type of corpuscles:
a. Lymphocytes
b. Monocytes
*c. Neutrophils
d. Basocytes
e. Erythrocytes
1933. During analysis of a blood sample, the laboratory assistant additionally noted that this sample belongs to a female patient. Such conclusion can be made based on the stuctural characteristics of certain blood corpuscles. Name this type of corpuscles:
a. Monocytes
*b. Neutrophils
c. Lymphocytes
d. Basocytes
e. Erythrocytes
1934. During analysis of a blood sample, the laboratory assistant additionally noted that this sample belongs to a female patient. Such conclusion can be made based on the stuctural characteristics of certain blood corpuscles. Name this type of corpuscles:
a. Monocytes
b. Erythrocytes
c. Lymphocytes
*d. Neutrophils
e. Basocytes
1935. During appointment with the dentist, patients often develop anxiety, fear, and depression. These psychoemotional changes occur due to increased secretion of a certain mediator in the central nervous system. Name this mediator:
a. Acetylcholine
b. Noradrenalin
c. GABA
*d. Serotonin
e. Dopamine
1936. During appointment with the dentist, patients often develop anxiety, fear, and depression. These psychoemotional changes occur due to increased secretion of a certain mediator in the central nervous system. Name this mediator:
a. Noradrenalin
*b. Serotonin
c. GABA
d. Acetylcholine
e. Dopamine
1937. During appointment with the dentist, patients often develop anxiety, fear, and depression. These psychoemotional changes occur due to increased secretion of a certain mediator in the central nervous system. Name this mediator:
a. Noradrenalin
b. GABA
c. Dopamine
d. Acetylcholine
*e. Serotonin
1938. During autopsy of the patient, who died of cardiovascular insufficiency, the patient's right foot is darkly colored. The vessels of the patient's thigh are partially obstructed by grayish-red clots. On the vessel walls there are yellowish-gray spots and fibrous plaques, some of which are of stony density. What clinicopathological type of atherosclerosis was complicated in the patient?
a. Atherosclerosis of aorta
b. Cerebral atherosclerosis
*c. Atherosclerosis of lower extremities
d. Vascular intestinal atherosclerosis
e. Renal atherosclerosis
1939. During autopsy of the patient, who died of cardiovascular insufficiency, the patient's right foot is darkly colored. The vessels of the patient's thigh are partially obstructed by grayish-red clots. On the vessel walls there are yellowish-gray spots and fibrous plaques, some of which are of stony density. What clinicopathological type of atherosclerosis was complicated in the patient?
a. Atherosclerosis of aorta
b. Cerebral atherosclerosis
c. Vascular intestinal atherosclerosis
d. Renal atherosclerosis
*e. Atherosclerosis of lower extremities
1940. During autopsy of the patient, who died of cardiovascular insufficiency, the patient's right foot is darkly colored. The vessels of the patient's thigh are partially obstructed by grayish-red clots. On the vessel walls there are yellowish-gray spots and fibrous plaques, some of which are of stony density. What clinicopathological type of atherosclerosis was complicated in the patient?
a. Atherosclerosis of aorta
b. Renal atherosclerosis
*c. Atherosclerosis of lower extremities
d. Vascular intestinal atherosclerosis
e. Cerebral atherosclerosis
1941. During cell analysis, their cytoplasm was determined to have high content of aminoacyl tRNA synthetase. This enzyme ensures the following process:
a. Elongation
b. Repair
*c. Amino acid activation
d. Transcription
e. Replication
1942. During cell analysis, their cytoplasm was determined to have high content of aminoacyl tRNA synthetase. This enzyme ensures the following process:
a. Elongation
b. Transcription
c. Repair
*d. Amino acid activation
e. Replication
1943. During cell analysis, their cytoplasm was determined to have high content of aminoacyl tRNA synthetase. This enzyme ensures the following process:
a. Transcription
b. Elongation
*c. Amino acid activation
d. Repair
e. Replication
1944. During chest X-ray, a patient was diagnosed with a diaphragmatic hernia, located in the posterior mediastinum. At what weak point of the diaphragm was this hernia formed?
a. Medial and lateral arcuate ligaments
b. Sternocostal triangle
*c. Lumbocostal triangle
d. Central tendon of the diaphragm
e. Opening of the inferior vena cava
1945. During chest X-ray, a patient was diagnosed with a diaphragmatic hernia, located in the posterior mediastinum. At what weak point of the diaphragm was this hernia formed?
a. Medial and lateral arcuate ligaments
b. Sternocostal triangle
*c. Lumbocostal triangle
d. Opening of the inferior vena cava
e. Central tendon of the diaphragm
1946. During chest X-ray, a patient was diagnosed with a diaphragmatic hernia, located in the posterior mediastinum. At what weak point of the diaphragm was this hernia formed?
a. Opening of the inferior vena cava
*b. Lumbocostal triangle
c. Sternocostal triangle
d. Central tendon of the diaphragm
e. Medial and lateral arcuate ligaments
1947. During dental manipulations in the oral cavity, a woman felt unwell: she developed headache and palpitations. Blood pressure measurement revealed a systolic pressure of 170 mm Hg. What is the normal value (mm Hg) of human systolic blood pressure?
*a. 100-120
b. 140-160
c. 60-80
d. 90-100
e. 160-180
1948. During dental manipulations in the oral cavity, a woman felt unwell: she developed headache and palpitations. Blood pressure measurement revealed a systolic pressure of 170 mm Hg. What is the normal value (mm Hg) of human systolic blood pressure?
*a. 100-120
b. 60-80
c. 90-100
d. 140-160
e. 160-180
1949. During dental manipulations in the oral cavity, a woman felt unwell: she developed headache and palpitations. Blood pressure measurement revealed a systolic pressure of 170 mm Hg. What is the normal value (mm Hg) of human systolic blood pressure?
a. 90-100
b. 140-160
*c. 100-120
d. 60-80
e. 160-180
1950. During emotional stress, a hormone-sensitive enzyme triglyceride lipase activates in the adipose tissue. What second messenger takes part in activation of this enzyme?
a. Inositol triphosphate
b. Ca^2+
*c. cAMP
d. cGMP
e. Diacylglycerol
1951. During emotional stress, a hormone-sensitive enzyme triglyceride lipase activates in the adipose tissue. What second messenger takes part in activation of this enzyme?
a. Inositol triphosphate
b. Diacylglycerol
c. Ca^2+
*d. cAMP
e. cGMP
1952. During emotional stress, a hormone-sensitive enzyme triglyceride lipase activates in the adipose tissue. What second messenger takes part in activation of this enzyme?
a. Inositol triphosphate
b. cGMP
c. Diacylglycerol
*d. cAMP
e. Ca^2+
1953. During examination a neurologist taps the tendon under the patient's kneecap with a reflex hammer to evaluate reflex extension of the knee. This response is provoked by stimulation of the following receptors:
*a. Muscle spindles
b. Golgi tendon organ
c. Articular receptors
d. Tactile receptors
e. Nociceptors
1954. During examination a neurologist taps the tendon under the patient's kneecap with a reflex hammer to evaluate reflex extension of the knee. This response is provoked by stimulation of the following receptors:
*a. Muscle spindles
b. Tactile receptors
c. Golgi tendon organ
d. Nociceptors
e. Articular receptors
1955. During examination a neurologist taps the tendon under the patient's kneecap with a reflex hammer to evaluate reflex extension of the knee. This response is provoked by stimulation of the following receptors:
a. Articular receptors
b. Tactile receptors
*c. Muscle spindles
d. Golgi tendon organ
e. Nociceptors
1956. During examination of a child's oral cavity a dentist noted the appearance of the first permanent molars on the child's lower jaw. How old is the child?
a. 12-13
*b. 6-7
c. 8-9
d. 4-5
e. 10-11
1957. During examination of a child's oral cavity a dentist noted the appearance of the first permanent molars on the child's lower jaw. How old is the child?
a. 8-9
b. 10-11
c. 12-13
*d. 6-7
e. 4-5
1958. During examination of a child's oral cavity a dentist noted the appearance of the first permanent molars on the child's lower jaw. How old is the child?
a. 8-9
b. 12-13
c. 4-5
*d. 6-7
e. 10-11
1959. During examination of the oral cavity at the vestibular surface of the lower right incisor there was detected a rounded growth on the thin pedicle. Histologically: in the connective tissue there are numerous thin-walled sinusoids, hemorrhage areas, hemosiderin foci, and giant cells resembling osteoclasts. Make the diagnosis:
a. Angiomatous epulis
b. Granular cell ameloblastoma
*c. Giant cell epulis
d. Cavernous hemangioma
e. Gingival fibromatosis
1960. During examination of the oral cavity at the vestibular surface of the lower right incisor there was detected a rounded growth on the thin pedicle. Histologically: in the connective tissue there are numerous thin-walled sinusoids, hemorrhage areas, hemosiderin foci, and giant cells resembling osteoclasts. Make the diagnosis:
a. Angiomatous epulis
b. Granular cell ameloblastoma
c. Cavernous hemangioma
d. Gingival fibromatosis
*e. Giant cell epulis
1961. During examination of the oral cavity at the vestibular surface of the lower right incisor there was detected a rounded growth on the thin pedicle. Histologically: in the connective tissue there are numerous thin-walled sinusoids, hemorrhage areas, hemosiderin foci, and giant cells resembling osteoclasts. Make the diagnosis:
a. Granular cell ameloblastoma
b. Angiomatous epulis
c. Gingival fibromatosis
d. Cavernous hemangioma
*e. Giant cell epulis
1962. During examination of the oral cavity, a dentist detected a carious cavity in the lower second premolar. The cavity is located on the crown surface that faces the first premolar. What surface of the dental crown is affected in this case?
*a. Facies mesialis
b. Facies lingualis
c. Facies vestibularis
d. Facies occlusalis
e. Facies distalis
1963. During examination of the oral cavity, a dentist detected a carious cavity in the lower second premolar. The cavity is located on the crown surface that faces the first premolar. What surface of the dental crown is affected in this case?
a. Facies distalis
b. Facies vestibularis
*c. Facies mesialis
d. Facies lingualis
e. Facies occlusalis
1964. During examination of the oral cavity, a dentist detected a carious cavity in the lower second premolar. The cavity is located on the crown surface that faces the first premolar. What surface of the dental crown is affected in this case?
a. Facies lingualis
b. Facies vestibularis
c. Facies distalis
*d. Facies mesialis
e. Facies occlusalis
1965. During examination of the patient's oral cavity a dentist noticed deformation of the teeth and a crescent indentation on the upper right inscisor. The teeth are undersized, barrel-shaped - tooth cervix is wider than its edge. The patient uses a hearing aid, suffers from visual impairment. What type of syphilis affects teeth in such a way?
a. Early congenital
b. Primary
*c. Late congenital
d. Secondary
e. Neurosyphilis
1966. During examination of the patient's oral cavity a dentist noticed deformation of the teeth and a crescent indentation on the upper right inscisor. The teeth are undersized, barrel-shaped - tooth cervix is wider than its edge. The patient uses a hearing aid, suffers from visual impairment. What type of syphilis affects teeth in such a way?
a. Neurosyphilis
b. Primary
*c. Late congenital
d. Secondary
e. Early congenital
1967. During examination of the patient's oral cavity a dentist noticed deformation of the teeth and a crescent indentation on the upper right inscisor. The teeth are undersized, barrel-shaped - tooth cervix is wider than its edge. The patient uses a hearing aid, suffers from visual impairment. What type of syphilis affects teeth in such a way?
a. Neurosyphilis
b. Primary
c. Secondary
*d. Late congenital
e. Early congenital
1968. During examination of the patients, a dentist noted that many of them have dull, non-glossy enamel with porcelain-like and pigmented spots. Some patients have single or multiple enamel defects that manifest as colorless or pigmented erosions. These changes in the teeth developed in the result of the excessive intake of a certain substance by the organism. Name this substance:
*a. Fluorine
b. Potassium
c. Magnesium
d. Calcium
e. Sodium
1969. During examination of the patients, a dentist noted that many of them have dull, non-glossy enamel with porcelain-like and pigmented spots. Some patients have single or multiple enamel defects that manifest as colorless or pigmented erosions. These changes in the teeth developed in the result of the excessive intake of a certain substance by the organism. Name this substance:
a. Magnesium
b. Potassium
c. Calcium
d. Sodium
*e. Fluorine
1970. During examination of the patients, a dentist noted that many of them have dull, non-glossy enamel with porcelain-like and pigmented spots. Some patients have single or multiple enamel defects that manifest as colorless or pigmented erosions. These changes in the teeth developed in the result of the excessive intake of a certain substance by the organism. Name this substance:
a. Sodium
b. Potassium
c. Magnesium
*d. Fluorine
e. Calcium
1971. During examination the doctor performs auscultation to assess the functioning of the patient's mitral valve. Where can the sound of this valve be auscultated?
*a. At the apex of the heart
b. At the edge of the sternum in the 2nd intercostal space on the left
c. At the edge of the sternum over the 5th costal cartilage on the right
d. At the edge of the sternum in the 2nd intercostal space on the right
e. At the edge of the sternum over the 5th costal cartilage on the left
1972. During examination the doctor performs auscultation to assess the functioning of the patient's mitral valve. Where can the sound of this valve be auscultated?
*a. At the apex of the heart
b. At the edge of the sternum in the 2nd intercostal space on the right
c. At the edge of the sternum in the 2nd intercostal space on the left
d. At the edge of the sternum over the 5th costal cartilage on the left
e. At the edge of the sternum over the 5th costal cartilage on the right
1973. During examination the doctor performs auscultation to assess the functioning of the patient's mitral valve. Where can the sound of this valve be auscultated?
a. At the edge of the sternum over the 5th costal cartilage on the left
*b. At the apex of the heart
c. At the edge of the sternum in the 2nd intercostal space on the right
d. At the edge of the sternum in the 2nd intercostal space on the left
e. At the edge of the sternum over the 5th costal cartilage on the right
1974. During experiment the processes of food and water hydrolysis products absorption were studied. It was determined that these processes mainly occur in the following gastrointestinal segment:
*a. Small intestine
b. Oral cavity
c. Stomach
d. Large intestine
e. Rectum
1975. During experiment the processes of food and water hydrolysis products absorption were studied. It was determined that these processes mainly occur in the following gastrointestinal segment:
a. Oral cavity
*b. Small intestine
c. Stomach
d. Large intestine
e. Rectum
1976. During experiment the processes of food and water hydrolysis products absorption were studied. It was determined that these processes mainly occur in the following gastrointestinal segment:
a. Rectum
b. Large intestine
c. Stomach
*d. Small intestine
e. Oral cavity
1977. During experiment, the myotome was destroyed in the rabbit fetus. This manipulation will result in malformation of the following structure:
a. Axial skeleton
*b. Skeletal muscles
c. Serous membranes
d. Smooth muscles
e. Dermal connective tissue
1978. During experiment, the myotome was destroyed in the rabbit fetus. This manipulation will result in malformation of the following structure:
a. Dermal connective tissue
*b. Skeletal muscles
c. Smooth muscles
d. Serous membranes
e. Axial skeleton
1979. During experiment, the myotome was destroyed in the rabbit fetus. This manipulation will result in malformation of the following structure:
a. Serous membranes
b. Smooth muscles
*c. Skeletal muscles
d. Dermal connective tissue
e. Axial skeleton
1980. During heart ultrasound a 1.5-year-old child presents with non-closure of the foramen ovale, which is clinically confirmed. Where in the heart is this defect located?
a. Cardiac apex
b. Interventricular septum
*c. Interatrial septum
d. Right atrioventricular valve
e. Left atrioventricular valve
1981. During heart ultrasound a 1.5-year-old child presents with non-closure of the foramen ovale, which is clinically confirmed. Where in the heart is this defect located?
a. Interventricular septum
b. Left atrioventricular valve
*c. Interatrial septum
d. Right atrioventricular valve
e. Cardiac apex
1982. During heart ultrasound a 1.5-year-old child presents with non-closure of the foramen ovale, which is clinically confirmed. Where in the heart is this defect located?
a. Left atrioventricular valve
b. Right atrioventricular valve
c. Cardiac apex
d. Interventricular septum
*e. Interatrial septum
1983. During identification of pure culture of microorganisms the most important part is a serological identification that is conducted by means of agglutination reaction. What components are necessary to conduct this reaction?
*a. Unknown bacterial culture, specific antibodies
b. Specific antigen, known antibody, bacteria
c. Specific antigen, serum sample obtained from the patient
d. Thermoextract, specific serum
e. Unknown antibodies, nonspecific antigen
1984. During identification of pure culture of microorganisms the most important part is a serological identification that is conducted by means of agglutination reaction. What components are necessary to conduct this reaction?
a. Specific antigen, serum sample obtained from the patient
b. Specific antigen, known antibody, bacteria
*c. Unknown bacterial culture, specific antibodies
d. Thermoextract, specific serum
e. Unknown antibodies, nonspecific antigen
1985. During identification of pure culture of microorganisms the most important part is a serological identification that is conducted by means of agglutination reaction. What components are necessary to conduct this reaction?
a. Thermoextract, specific serum
b. Unknown antibodies, nonspecific antigen
c. Specific antigen, known antibody, bacteria
*d. Unknown bacterial culture, specific antibodies
e. Specific antigen, serum sample obtained from the patient
1986. During kidney microscopy, the pathologist noticed crescent-shaped epithelial formations in the outer layer of the Bowman's capsule in 80% of the glomeruli. He concluded that such clinical presentation corresponds with:
a. Intracapillary exudative glomerulonephritis
b. Fibroplastic glomerulonephritis
c. Intracapillary proliferative glomerulonephritis
*d. Rapidly progressive extracapillary proliferative glomerulonephritis
e. Extracapillary exudative glomerulonephritis
1987. During kidney microscopy, the pathologist noticed crescent-shaped epithelial formations in the outer layer of the Bowman's capsule in 80% of the glomeruli. He concluded that such clinical presentation corresponds with:
a. Intracapillary proliferative glomerulonephritis
*b. Rapidly progressive extracapillary proliferative glomerulonephritis
c. Extracapillary exudative glomerulonephritis
d. Fibroplastic glomerulonephritis
e. Intracapillary exudative glomerulonephritis
1988. During kidney microscopy, the pathologist noticed crescent-shaped epithelial formations in the outer layer of the Bowman's capsule in 80% of the glomeruli. He concluded that such clinical presentation corresponds with:
a. Intracapillary proliferative glomerulonephritis
*b. Rapidly progressive extracapillary proliferative glomerulonephritis
c. Intracapillary exudative glomerulonephritis
d. Extracapillary exudative glomerulonephritis
e. Fibroplastic glomerulonephritis
1989. During laboratory diagnostics of hepatitis C, it is necessary to detect the presence of antibodies to hepatitis C virus in the patient's blood serum. What test should be conducted in this case?
a. DNA probe method
b. Ligase chain reaction
c. Nucleic acid hybridization with signal amplification
*d. Enzyme-linked immuno sorbent assay (ELISA)
e. Nucleic acid hybridization
1990. During laboratory diagnostics of hepatitis C, it is necessary to detect the presence of antibodies to hepatitis C virus in the patient's blood serum. What test should be conducted in this case?
a. Ligase chain reaction
b. Nucleic acid hybridization with signal amplification
c. Nucleic acid hybridization
*d. Enzyme-linked immuno sorbent assay (ELISA)
e. DNA probe method
1991. During laboratory diagnostics of hepatitis C, it is necessary to detect the presence of antibodies to hepatitis C virus in the patient's blood serum. What test should be conducted in this case?
a. Nucleic acid hybridization
b. Nucleic acid hybridization with signal amplification
*c. Enzyme-linked immuno sorbent assay (ELISA)
d. DNA probe method
e. Ligase chain reaction
1992. During microscopy of an embryo material, a yolk sac is visible in the microslide. What is the main function of this organ in the human body?
a. Excretory
b. Protective
*c. Hemopoietic
d. Amniotic fluid production
e. Trophic
1993. During microscopy of an embryo material, a yolk sac is visible in the microslide. What is the main function of this organ in the human body?
a. Excretory
b. Trophic
c. Amniotic fluid production
d. Protective
*e. Hemopoietic
1994. During microscopy of an embryo material, a yolk sac is visible in the microslide. What is the main function of this organ in the human body?
a. Protective
b. Excretory
c. Trophic
d. Amniotic fluid production
*e. Hemopoietic
1995. During mitosis, chromosome disjunction and movement toward opposite poles of the cell has been disturbed because of the decay of microtubules, contained in the centrioles. What protein makes up centriole microtubules?
*a. Tubulin
b. Actin
c. Dynein
d. Vimentin
e. Myosin
1996. During mitosis, chromosome disjunction and movement toward opposite poles of the cell has been disturbed because of the decay of microtubules, contained in the centrioles. What protein makes up centriole microtubules?
a. Actin
b. Dynein
c. Vimentin
*d. Tubulin
e. Myosin
1997. During mitosis, chromosome disjunction and movement toward opposite poles of the cell has been disturbed because of the decay of microtubules, contained in the centrioles. What protein makes up centriole microtubules?
a. Dynein
*b. Tubulin
c. Actin
d. Myosin
e. Vimentin
1998. During oral cavity examination a dentist noticed eruption of the permanent canines in a child. The child grows and develops normally. Determine the child's age:
*a. 11-13 years
b. 6-7 years
c. 8-9 years
d. 13-16 years
e. 9-10 years
1999. During oral cavity examination a dentist noticed eruption of the permanent canines in a child. The child grows and develops normally. Determine the child's age:
a. 6-7 years
*b. 11-13 years
c. 8-9 years
d. 13-16 years
e. 9-10 years
2000. During oral cavity examination a dentist noticed eruption of the permanent canines in a child. The child grows and develops normally. Determine the child's age:
a. 9-10 years
b. 6-7 years
c. 8-9 years
d. 13-16 years
*e. 11-13 years
2001. During oral examination, a dentist noted that the patient's tongue has a whitish coat. What histological structures take part in the formation of this coat?
a. Epithelium of circumvallate papillae
b. Epithelium of fungiform papillae
*c. Epithelium of filiform papillae
d. Epithelium of foliate papillae
e. Lingual tonsil
2002. During oral examination, a dentist noted that the patient's tongue has a whitish coat. What histological structures take part in the formation of this coat?
a. Epithelium of circumvallate papillae
b. Lingual tonsil
*c. Epithelium of filiform papillae
d. Epithelium of fungiform papillae
e. Epithelium of foliate papillae
2003. During oral examination, a dentist noted that the patient's tongue has a whitish coat. What histological structures take part in the formation of this coat?
a. Epithelium of foliate papillae
*b. Epithelium of filiform papillae
c. Lingual tonsil
d. Epithelium of circumvallate papillae
e. Epithelium of fungiform papillae
2004. During parodontosis, destruction of protein and polysaccharide components of connective tissue occurs. Which of the proteins listed below is a component of connective tissue?
*a. Collagen
b. Antitrypsin
c. Albumin
d. Ceruloplasmin
e. Transferrin
2005. During parodontosis, destruction of protein and polysaccharide components of connective tissue occurs. Which of the proteins listed below is a component of connective tissue?
a. Antitrypsin
b. Ceruloplasmin
*c. Collagen
d. Transferrin
e. Albumin
2006. During parodontosis, destruction of protein and polysaccharide components of connective tissue occurs. Which of the proteins listed below is a component of connective tissue?
a. Ceruloplasmin
b. Albumin
c. Antitrypsin
*d. Collagen
e. Transferrin
2007. During physical and emotional exertion a person is less sensitive to pain. This phenomenon occurs due to activation of the:
a. Nociceptive system
b. Parasympathetic system
c. Adrenal function
d. Thyroid function
*e. Antinociceptive system
2008. During physical and emotional exertion a person is less sensitive to pain. This phenomenon occurs due to activation of the:
a. Nociceptive system
b. Thyroid function
*c. Antinociceptive system
d. Adrenal function
e. Parasympathetic system
2009. During physical and emotional exertion a person is less sensitive to pain. This phenomenon occurs due to activation of the:
a. Nociceptive system
b. Thyroid function
c. Parasympathetic system
*d. Antinociceptive system
e. Adrenal function
2010. During pregnancy, specific proteins that can destroy rhesus-positive erythrocytes of the fetus were detected in the blood of a rhesus-negative mother. Name this defensive component of the mother's body:
a. Antigen
b. Serum
c. Enzyme
d. Hormone
*e. Antibody
2011. During pregnancy, specific proteins that can destroy rhesus-positive erythrocytes of the fetus were detected in the blood of a rhesus-negative mother. Name this defensive component of the mother's body:
a. Enzyme
b. Serum
c. Antigen
*d. Antibody
e. Hormone
2012. During preventive examination a man presents with enlarged thyroid gland, exophthalmia, body temperature of 37.3^oC, tachycardia, and trembling fingers. What pathology of the thyroid gland did the patient develop?
a. Endemic goiter
b. Sporadic cretinism
c. Myxedema
*d. Graves' disease
e. Thyroid adenoma
2013. During preventive examination a man presents with enlarged thyroid gland, exophthalmia, body temperature of 37.3^oC, tachycardia, and trembling fingers. What pathology of the thyroid gland did the patient develop?
a. Sporadic cretinism
b. Endemic goiter
*c. Graves' disease
d. Myxedema
e. Thyroid adenoma
2014. During preventive examination a man presents with enlarged thyroid gland, exophthalmia, body temperature of 37.3^oC, tachycardia, and trembling fingers. What pathology of the thyroid gland did the patient develop?
a. Sporadic cretinism
b. Myxedema
c. Endemic goiter
d. Thyroid adenoma
*e. Graves' disease
2015. During removal of a carious tooth, the dental surgeon noticed a soft  elastic gray-pink nodule 1.3 cm in diameter in the region of the dental root. Microscopically, the nodule consists of granulation tissue with lymphocytes, plasma cells, mast cells, macrophages, xanthome cells, and fibroblasts. Make the diagnosis:
a. Cystic granuloma
b. Granulating periodontitis
c. Epithelial granuloma
*d. Simple granuloma
e. Eosinophilic granuloma
2016. During removal of a carious tooth, the dental surgeon noticed a soft  elastic gray-pink nodule 1.3 cm in diameter in the region of the dental root. Microscopically, the nodule consists of granulation tissue with lymphocytes, plasma cells, mast cells, macrophages, xanthome cells, and fibroblasts. Make the diagnosis:
a. Eosinophilic granuloma
*b. Simple granuloma
c. Cystic granuloma
d. Granulating periodontitis
e. Epithelial granuloma
2017. During removal of a carious tooth, the dental surgeon noticed a soft  elastic gray-pink nodule 1.3 cm in diameter in the region of the dental root. Microscopically, the nodule consists of granulation tissue with lymphocytes, plasma cells, mast cells, macrophages, xanthome cells, and fibroblasts. Make the diagnosis:
a. Granulating periodontitis
*b. Simple granuloma
c. Cystic granuloma
d. Epithelial granuloma
e. Eosinophilic granuloma
2018. During starvation, the mass of organs and tissues decreases. What organ loses the most mass during the first stage of starvation?
a. Brain
b. Kidneys
c. Muscles
d. Heart
*e. Liver
2019. During starvation, the mass of organs and tissues decreases. What organ loses the most mass during the first stage of starvation?
a. Brain
b. Muscles
c. Kidneys
d. Heart
*e. Liver
2020. During starvation, the mass of organs and tissues decreases. What organ loses the most mass during the first stage of starvation?
a. Muscles
b. Heart
c. Kidneys
d. Brain
*e. Liver
2021. During surgery on the stomach, the surgeon has cut the left gastric artery and ligated it. However the opposite end of the cut artery continued to bleed. What artery anastomoses with the left gastric artery?
*a. Right gastric artery
b. Right gastroepiploic artery
c. Left gastroepiploic artery
d. Splenic artery
e. Superior pancreaticoduodenal artery
2022. During surgery on the stomach, the surgeon has cut the left gastric artery and ligated it. However the opposite end of the cut artery continued to bleed. What artery anastomoses with the left gastric artery?
a. Left gastroepiploic artery
b. Right gastroepiploic artery
*c. Right gastric artery
d. Splenic artery
e. Superior pancreaticoduodenal artery
2023. During surgery on the stomach, the surgeon has cut the left gastric artery and ligated it. However the opposite end of the cut artery continued to bleed. What artery anastomoses with the left gastric artery?
a. Right gastroepiploic artery
b. Superior pancreaticoduodenal artery
*c. Right gastric artery
d. Splenic artery
e. Left gastroepiploic artery
2024. During teeth examination on the lateral surface of the first upper molar there was detected a cone-shaped carious cavity with base oriented towards the tooth surface and apex - towards the tooth center. Softened dentin is visible at the floor of the carious cavity. Make the diagnosis:
a. -
*b. Dentin caries
c. Cement caries
d. Tooth erosion
e. Enamel caries
2025. During teeth examination on the lateral surface of the first upper molar there was detected a cone-shaped carious cavity with base oriented towards the tooth surface and apex - towards the tooth center. Softened dentin is visible at the floor of the carious cavity. Make the diagnosis:
a. Enamel caries
b. -
c. Cement caries
d. Tooth erosion
*e. Dentin caries
2026. During teeth examination on the lateral surface of the first upper molar there was detected a cone-shaped carious cavity with base oriented towards the tooth surface and apex - towards the tooth center. Softened dentin is visible at the floor of the carious cavity. Make the diagnosis:
a. Tooth erosion
b. Enamel caries
c. -
d. Cement caries
*e. Dentin caries
2027. During the appendectomy, the patient's a. appendicularis was ligated. This vessel is a branch of the following artery:
*a. ileocolica
b. colica media
c. mesenterica inferior
d. colica dextra
e. sigmoidea
2028. During the appendectomy, the patient's a. appendicularis was ligated. This vessel is a branch of the following artery:
*a. ileocolica
b. sigmoidea
c. colica dextra
d. colica media
e. mesenterica inferior
2029. During the appendectomy, the patient's a. appendicularis was ligated. This vessel is a branch of the following artery:
a. sigmoidea
*b. ileocolica
c. colica dextra
d. colica media
e. mesenterica inferior
2030. During the neurologist's examination, a patient presents with a sensory loss on the back surface of the left hand. Name this phenomenon:
a. Alexia
b. Atony
c. Ataxia
d. Asthenia
*e. Anesthesia
2031. During the neurologist's examination, a patient presents with a sensory loss on the back surface of the left hand. Name this phenomenon:
a. Asthenia
b. Alexia
c. Ataxia
*d. Anesthesia
e. Atony
2032. During the neurologist's examination, a patient presents with a sensory loss on the back surface of the left hand. Name this phenomenon:
a. Ataxia
*b. Anesthesia
c. Asthenia
d. Alexia
e. Atony
2033. During the oral cavity examination, the dentist detected an inflammation of the tissues that surround the tooth. What anatomical structure is inflamed in this case?
*a. Paradontium
b. Gingiva
c. Alveola dentalis
d. -
e. Cementum
2034. During the oral cavity examination, the dentist detected an inflammation of the tissues that surround the tooth. What anatomical structure is inflamed in this case?
a. Gingiva
b. -
c. Alveola dentalis
*d. Paradontium
e. Cementum
2035. During the oral cavity examination, the dentist detected an inflammation of the tissues that surround the tooth. What anatomical structure is inflamed in this case?
a. Gingiva
b. -
c. Cementum
*d. Paradontium
e. Alveola dentalis
2036. During the study of pancreatic cells, disturbed functions of concentration, dehydration, and condensation of intracellular secretion products was detected at the subcellular level. What organelle ensures these processes?
*a. Golgi complex
b. Lysosome
c. Endoplasmic reticulum
d. Ribosome
e. Mitochondria
2037. During the study of pancreatic cells, disturbed functions of concentration, dehydration, and condensation of intracellular secretion products was detected at the subcellular level. What organelle ensures these processes?
*a. Golgi complex
b. Mitochondria
c. Ribosome
d. Lysosome
e. Endoplasmic reticulum
2038. During the study of pancreatic cells, disturbed functions of concentration, dehydration, and condensation of intracellular secretion products was detected at the subcellular level. What organelle ensures these processes?
a. Ribosome
b. Endoplasmic reticulum
*c. Golgi complex
d. Lysosome
e. Mitochondria
2039. During their expedition to the Middle East, the students found a 7-centimeter-long arthropod. Its body consists of cephalothorax with 4 pairs of ambulatory legs and segmented abdomen with two venom glands in its last segment. The gland openings are located on the tip of the hook-shaped sting. The animal was identified as a nocturnal predator, its venom is dangerous for humans. It belongs to the following order:
a. Aphaniptera
b. Aranei
*c. Scorpiones
d. Solpugae
e. Acarina
2040. During their expedition to the Middle East, the students found a 7-centimeter-long arthropod. Its body consists of cephalothorax with 4 pairs of ambulatory legs and segmented abdomen with two venom glands in its last segment. The gland openings are located on the tip of the hook-shaped sting. The animal was identified as a nocturnal predator, its venom is dangerous for humans. It belongs to the following order:
a. Aranei
b. Aphaniptera
*c. Scorpiones
d. Solpugae
e. Acarina
2041. During their expedition to the Middle East, the students found a 7-centimeter-long arthropod. Its body consists of cephalothorax with 4 pairs of ambulatory legs and segmented abdomen with two venom glands in its last segment. The gland openings are located on the tip of the hook-shaped sting. The animal was identified as a nocturnal predator, its venom is dangerous for humans. It belongs to the following order:
a. Solpugae
b. Acarina
c. Aphaniptera
d. Aranei
*e. Scorpiones
2042. During tooth development, dentin is the first tissue to be laid down. What is the source of its development?
a. Dental lamina
b. Outer enamel epithelium
*c. Dental papilla
d. Inner enamel epithelium
e. Dental follicle
2043. During tooth development, dentin is the first tissue to be laid down. What is the source of its development?
a. Inner enamel epithelium
b. Dental lamina
c. Outer enamel epithelium
*d. Dental papilla
e. Dental follicle
2044. During tooth extraction, novocaine (procaine) is administered to the area of a sensitive nerve, which results in an anesthetic effect because of disturbed:
a. Axonal transport
b. Formation of pain mediators
c. Tissue pH
d. Excitability of pain receptors
*e. Conduction of pain impulses
2045. During tooth extraction, novocaine (procaine) is administered to the area of a sensitive nerve, which results in an anesthetic effect because of disturbed:
a. Excitability of pain receptors
*b. Conduction of pain impulses
c. Formation of pain mediators
d. Axonal transport
e. Tissue pH
2046. During tooth extraction, novocaine (procaine) is administered to the area of a sensitive nerve, which results in an anesthetic effect because of disturbed:
a. Formation of pain mediators
b. Excitability of pain receptors
c. Tissue pH
d. Axonal transport
*e. Conduction of pain impulses
2047. During ultrasound a patient with atherosclerosis was diagnosed with bilateral stenosis of the renal arteries. Specify the bioactive substance that is the key pathogenetic link in the development of arterial hypertension in this case:
*a. Renin
b. Adrenaline
c. Thyroxin
d. Cortisol
e. Vasopressin
2048. During ultrasound a patient with atherosclerosis was diagnosed with bilateral stenosis of the renal arteries. Specify the bioactive substance that is the key pathogenetic link in the development of arterial hypertension in this case:
a. Adrenaline
b. Thyroxin
*c. Renin
d. Vasopressin
e. Cortisol
2049. During ultrasound a patient with atherosclerosis was diagnosed with bilateral stenosis of the renal arteries. Specify the bioactive substance that is the key pathogenetic link in the development of arterial hypertension in this case:
a. Cortisol
b. Adrenaline
c. Vasopressin
*d. Renin
e. Thyroxin
2050. During vascular-platelet hemostasis, platelet factor (PF-8) thrombostenin is released from destroyed platelets. What is its function?
a. Erythrocyte hemolysis
b. Platelet aggregation
c. Erythrocyte agglutination
d. Platelet adhesion
*e. Thrombus retraction
2051. During vascular-platelet hemostasis, platelet factor (PF-8) thrombostenin is released from destroyed platelets. What is its function?
a. Erythrocyte hemolysis
b. Platelet aggregation
c. Platelet adhesion
*d. Thrombus retraction
e. Erythrocyte agglutination
2052. During vascular-platelet hemostasis, platelet factor (PF-8) thrombostenin is released from destroyed platelets. What is its function?
a. Platelet aggregation
b. Platelet adhesion
c. Erythrocyte hemolysis
d. Erythrocyte agglutination
*e. Thrombus retraction
2053. Dysfunction of the islets of Langerhans causes a decrease in the production of certain substances. Name these substances:
a. Insulin and adrenaline
*b. Glucagon and insulin
c. Parathyroid hormone and cortisone
d. Kallikrein and angiotensin
e. Thyroxine and calcitonin
2054. Dysfunction of the islets of Langerhans causes a decrease in the production of certain substances. Name these substances:
a. Parathyroid hormone and cortisone
b. Thyroxine and calcitonin
*c. Glucagon and insulin
d. Insulin and adrenaline
e. Kallikrein and angiotensin
2055. Dysfunction of the islets of Langerhans causes a decrease in the production of certain substances. Name these substances:
a. Thyroxine and calcitonin
b. Kallikrein and angiotensin
c. Parathyroid hormone and cortisone
d. Insulin and adrenaline
*e. Glucagon and insulin
2056. Electric current has affected skeletal muscle fiber resulting in depolarization of the membrane. Depolarization develops due to the following ions penetrating the membrane:
*a. Na^+
b. K^+
c. HCO^3-
d. Cl^-
e. Ca^2+
2057. Electric current has affected skeletal muscle fiber resulting in depolarization of the membrane. Depolarization develops due to the following ions penetrating the membrane:
a. Ca^2+
*b. Na^+
c. Cl^-
d. K^+
e. HCO^3-
2058. Electric current has affected skeletal muscle fiber resulting in depolarization of the membrane. Depolarization develops due to the following ions penetrating the membrane:
a. Ca^2+
b. Cl^-
*c. Na^+
d. HCO^3-
e. K^+
2059. Electronic microscopy of a kidney shows tubules paved with cuboidal epithelium. In the epithelium there are light and dark cells. The light cells contain few organelles; their cytoplasm forms folds. These cells provide reabsorption of water from primary urine into blood. The dark cells structurally and functionally resemble gastric parietal cells. What tubules are shown on the microslide?
a. Descending limb of loop of Henle
b. Ascending limb of loop of Henle
c. Proximal tubules
d. Distal tubules
*e. Collecting tubules
2060. Electronic microscopy of a kidney shows tubules paved with cuboidal epithelium. In the epithelium there are light and dark cells. The light cells contain few organelles; their cytoplasm forms folds. These cells provide reabsorption of water from primary urine into blood. The dark cells structurally and functionally resemble gastric parietal cells. What tubules are shown on the microslide?
a. Distal tubules
b. Proximal tubules
c. Descending limb of loop of Henle
*d. Collecting tubules
e. Ascending limb of loop of Henle
2061. Electronic microscopy of a kidney shows tubules paved with cuboidal epithelium. In the epithelium there are light and dark cells. The light cells contain few organelles; their cytoplasm forms folds. These cells provide reabsorption of water from primary urine into blood. The dark cells structurally and functionally resemble gastric parietal cells. What tubules are shown on the microslide?
a. Proximal tubules
b. Descending limb of loop of Henle
c. Distal tubules
*d. Collecting tubules
e. Ascending limb of loop of Henle
2062. Enzyme cofactors include various derivatives of water-soluble vitamins. Which one of them is a component of aminotransferases?
a. 1
*b. 6
c. 2
d. 3
e. 
2063. Enzyme cofactors include various derivatives of water-soluble vitamins. Which one of them is a component of aminotransferases?
a. 1
*b. 6
c. 
d. 2
e. 3
2064. Enzyme cofactors include various derivatives of water-soluble vitamins. Which one of them is a component of aminotransferases?
a. 2
b. 1
c. 
d. 3
*e. 6
2065. Epidermis regeneration in the areas of traumatic damage occurs  because of a growth zone (Malpighian layer). What epidermal layers are included into this zone?
*a. Stratum basale and stratum spinosum
b. Stratum basale and stratum corneum
c. Stratum spinosum and stratum granulosum
d. Stratum granulosum and stratum lucidum
e. Stratum lucidum and stratum corneum
2066. Epidermis regeneration in the areas of traumatic damage occurs  because of a growth zone (Malpighian layer). What epidermal layers are included into this zone?
*a. Stratum basale and stratum spinosum
b. Stratum basale and stratum corneum
c. Stratum spinosum and stratum granulosum
d. Stratum lucidum and stratum corneum
e. Stratum granulosum and stratum lucidum
2067. Epidermis regeneration in the areas of traumatic damage occurs  because of a growth zone (Malpighian layer). What epidermal layers are included into this zone?
a. Stratum basale and stratum corneum
b. Stratum granulosum and stratum lucidum
c. Stratum spinosum and stratum granulosum
*d. Stratum basale and stratum spinosum
e. Stratum lucidum and stratum corneum
2068. Erythrocyte needs energy in the form of ATP for its vital functions. What process supplies erythrocytes with necessary amount of ATP?
*a. Anaerobic glycolysis
b. Tricarboxylic acid cycle
c. beta-oxidation of fatty acids
d. Aerobic oxidation of glucose
e. Pentose phosphate pathway
2069. Erythrocyte needs energy in the form of ATP for its vital functions. What process supplies erythrocytes with necessary amount of ATP?
a. Pentose phosphate pathway
*b. Anaerobic glycolysis
c. Tricarboxylic acid cycle
d. Aerobic oxidation of glucose
e. beta-oxidation of fatty acids
2070. Erythrocyte needs energy in the form of ATP for its vital functions. What process supplies erythrocytes with necessary amount of ATP?
a. Tricarboxylic acid cycle
*b. Anaerobic glycolysis
c. Aerobic oxidation of glucose
d. Pentose phosphate pathway
e. beta-oxidation of fatty acids
2071. Erythrocytes of a person with fourth blood group (genotype ) contain both antigen A controlled by allele IA and antigen B that is the product of allele IB expression. What type of gene interaction is demonstrated by this phenomenon?
*a. Codominance
b. Epistasis
c. Polymery
d. Semidominance
e. Complementarity
2072. Erythrocytes of a person with fourth blood group (genotype ) contain both antigen A controlled by allele IA and antigen B that is the product of allele IB expression. What type of gene interaction is demonstrated by this phenomenon?
*a. Codominance
b. Epistasis
c. Semidominance
d. Complementarity
e. Polymery
2073. Erythrocytes of a person with fourth blood group (genotype ) contain both antigen A controlled by allele IA and antigen B that is the product of allele IB expression. What type of gene interaction is demonstrated by this phenomenon?
a. Semidominance
b. Polymery
*c. Codominance
d. Epistasis
e. Complementarity
2074. Erythrocytes of the patient with hemolytic anemia present with significant decrease of pyruvate kinase activity. What methabolic process is disturbed in this case?
*a. Glycolysis
b. Gluconeogenesis
c. Glycogen synthesis
d. Glycogenolysis
e. Pentose-phosphate pathway of glucose oxidation
2075. Erythrocytes of the patient with hemolytic anemia present with significant decrease of pyruvate kinase activity. What methabolic process is disturbed in this case?
a. Gluconeogenesis
b. Glycogen synthesis
c. Pentose-phosphate pathway of glucose oxidation
d. Glycogenolysis
*e. Glycolysis
2076. Erythrocytes of the patient with hemolytic anemia present with significant decrease of pyruvate kinase activity. What methabolic process is disturbed in this case?
a. Glycogen synthesis
*b. Glycolysis
c. Glycogenolysis
d. Pentose-phosphate pathway of glucose oxidation
e. Gluconeogenesis
2077. Every diet includes products with dietary fiber. These fibers cannot be digested by gastrointestinal enzymes and cannot be absorbed by the body. What is the role of dietary fiber?
a. Inhibits motor function of alimentary tract
b. Inhibits secretion of enzymes in digestive juices
c. Inhibits absorptive function of alimentary tract
*d. Stimulates motor function of alimentary tract
e. Inhibits secretory function of alimentary tract
2078. Every diet includes products with dietary fiber. These fibers cannot be digested by gastrointestinal enzymes and cannot be absorbed by the body. What is the role of dietary fiber?
a. Inhibits secretion of enzymes in digestive juices
b. Inhibits secretory function of alimentary tract
*c. Stimulates motor function of alimentary tract
d. Inhibits motor function of alimentary tract
e. Inhibits absorptive function of alimentary tract
2079. Every diet includes products with dietary fiber. These fibers cannot be digested by gastrointestinal enzymes and cannot be absorbed by the body. What is the role of dietary fiber?
a. Inhibits secretory function of alimentary tract
b. Inhibits secretion of enzymes in digestive juices
c. Inhibits absorptive function of alimentary tract
d. Inhibits motor function of alimentary tract
*e. Stimulates motor function of alimentary tract
2080. Examination detects a fracture of the lateral forearm bone in its middle third. What part of what forearm bone is injured in this case?
*a. Diaphysis of the radius
b. Metaphysis of the ulna
c. Diaphysis of the ulna
d. Epiphysis of the ulna
e. Epiphysis of the radius
2081. Examination detects a fracture of the lateral forearm bone in its middle third. What part of what forearm bone is injured in this case?
a. Diaphysis of the ulna
b. Epiphysis of the radius
c. Epiphysis of the ulna
*d. Diaphysis of the radius
e. Metaphysis of the ulna
2082. Examination detects a fracture of the lateral forearm bone in its middle third. What part of what forearm bone is injured in this case?
a. Epiphysis of the radius
b. Metaphysis of the ulna
c. Epiphysis of the ulna
d. Diaphysis of the ulna
*e. Diaphysis of the radius
2083. Examination of a 15-year-old patient shows that after a maxillofacial trauma he is unable to move his lower jaw downward. This pathology is likely to be caused by a damaged muscle. What muscle is damaged?
*a. Geniohyoid muscle
b. Temporal muscle
c. Masseter
d. Lateral pterygoid muscle
e. Medial pterygoid muscle
2084. Examination of a 15-year-old patient shows that after a maxillofacial trauma he is unable to move his lower jaw downward. This pathology is likely to be caused by a damaged muscle. What muscle is damaged?
*a. Geniohyoid muscle
b. Temporal muscle
c. Medial pterygoid muscle
d. Lateral pterygoid muscle
e. Masseter
2085. Examination of a 15-year-old patient shows that after a maxillofacial trauma he is unable to move his lower jaw downward. This pathology is likely to be caused by a damaged muscle. What muscle is damaged?
a. Temporal muscle
b. Medial pterygoid muscle
c. Masseter
*d. Geniohyoid muscle
e. Lateral pterygoid muscle
2086. Examination of a 32-year-od man shows disproportional skeletal structure and enlargement of the supraorbital ridge, nose, lips, tongue, jawbones, and feet. What is the likely cause of these disturbances?
a. Decreased concentration of insulin
*b. Increased levels of somatotropin
c. Increased concentration of glucagon
d. Increased levels of catecholamines
e. Increased levels of thyroxine
2087. Examination of a 32-year-od man shows disproportional skeletal structure and enlargement of the supraorbital ridge, nose, lips, tongue, jawbones, and feet. What is the likely cause of these disturbances?
a. Increased concentration of glucagon
*b. Increased levels of somatotropin
c. Increased levels of catecholamines
d. Increased levels of thyroxine
e. Decreased concentration of insulin
2088. Examination of a 32-year-od man shows disproportional skeletal structure and enlargement of the supraorbital ridge, nose, lips, tongue, jawbones, and feet. What is the likely cause of these disturbances?
a. Increased concentration of glucagon
*b. Increased levels of somatotropin
c. Increased levels of thyroxine
d. Decreased concentration of insulin
e. Increased levels of catecholamines
2089. Examination of a child detected a patent foramen ovale. Where is this foramen located?
a. Between the left atrium and left ventricle
b. Between the left and right ventricles
c. Between the right atrium and right ventricle
*d. Between the left and right atria
e. In the region of the mitral valve
2090. Examination of a child detected a patent foramen ovale. Where is this foramen located?
a. In the region of the mitral valve
*b. Between the left and right atria
c. Between the left atrium and left ventricle
d. Between the left and right ventricles
e. Between the right atrium and right ventricle
2091. Examination of a child detected a patent foramen ovale. Where is this foramen located?
a. In the region of the mitral valve
*b. Between the left and right atria
c. Between the right atrium and right ventricle
d. Between the left atrium and left ventricle
e. Between the left and right ventricles
2092. Examination of a child detected dense painless nodules 5--7 mm in size within the skin of the occipital region. Similar formations were detected around the knee joints and along the tendons of the lower limbs. Pathohistological conclusion of the biopsy material studies: macrophage granuloma. Clinical diagnosis: rheumatism. Specify the clinical and morphological form of rheumatism observed in this case.
*a. Erythema nodosum
b. Muscular rheumatism
c. Cerebral rheumatism
d. Cardiovascular rheumatism
e. Polyarthritic rheumatism
2093. Examination of a child detected dense painless nodules 5--7 mm in size within the skin of the occipital region. Similar formations were detected around the knee joints and along the tendons of the lower limbs. Pathohistological conclusion of the biopsy material studies: macrophage granuloma. Clinical diagnosis: rheumatism. Specify the clinical and morphological form of rheumatism observed in this case.
a. Cardiovascular rheumatism
b. Cerebral rheumatism
c. Polyarthritic rheumatism
*d. Erythema nodosum
e. Muscular rheumatism
2094. Examination of a child detected dense painless nodules 5--7 mm in size within the skin of the occipital region. Similar formations were detected around the knee joints and along the tendons of the lower limbs. Pathohistological conclusion of the biopsy material studies: macrophage granuloma. Clinical diagnosis: rheumatism. Specify the clinical and morphological form of rheumatism observed in this case.
a. Cerebral rheumatism
b. Polyarthritic rheumatism
*c. Erythema nodosum
d. Cardiovascular rheumatism
e. Muscular rheumatism
2095. Examination of a fetus shows cleft upper lip. What congenital facial malformation is it?
*a. Cheiloschisis
b. Hypertelorism
c. Palatoschisis
d. Micrognathia
e. Macrostomia
2096. Examination of a fetus shows cleft upper lip. What congenital facial malformation is it?
a. Hypertelorism
*b. Cheiloschisis
c. Micrognathia
d. Macrostomia
e. Palatoschisis
2097. Examination of a fetus shows cleft upper lip. What congenital facial malformation is it?
a. Palatoschisis
b. Hypertelorism
*c. Cheiloschisis
d. Micrognathia
e. Macrostomia
2098. Examination of a hematopoietic organ reveals lobules formed by a lymphoid tissue with stroma that consists of epithelioreticular cells. What organ is being studied?
*a. Thymus
b. Palatine tonsil
c. Red bone marrow
d. Lymph node
e. Spleen
2099. Examination of a hematopoietic organ reveals lobules formed by a lymphoid tissue with stroma that consists of epithelioreticular cells. What organ is being studied?
a. Lymph node
*b. Thymus
c. Red bone marrow
d. Spleen
e. Palatine tonsil
2100. Examination of a hematopoietic organ reveals lobules formed by a lymphoid tissue with stroma that consists of epithelioreticular cells. What organ is being studied?
a. Spleen
b. Red bone marrow
*c. Thymus
d. Lymph node
e. Palatine tonsil
2101. Examination of a patient detects an anomaly of enamel development. What structural components of the tooth bud were damaged, causing this condition?
a. Stellate reticulum
b. Stratum intermedium
*c. Inner enamel epithelium
d. Cervical loop
e. Outer enamel epithelium
2102. Examination of a patient detects an anomaly of enamel development. What structural components of the tooth bud were damaged, causing this condition?
a. Stratum intermedium
b. Cervical loop
*c. Inner enamel epithelium
d. Stellate reticulum
e. Outer enamel epithelium
2103. Examination of a patient detects an anomaly of enamel development. What structural components of the tooth bud were damaged, causing this condition?
a. Stratum intermedium
b. Outer enamel epithelium
c. Stellate reticulum
*d. Inner enamel epithelium
e. Cervical loop
2104. Examination of a patient detects calcinosis cutis, Raynaud syndrome, esophageal motility disorder, sclerodactyly, and telangiectasia. These changes are called CREST syndrome. What disease can be characterized by the described changes?
*a. Systemic scleroderma
b. Dermatomyositis
c. Rheumatoid arthritis
d. Gouty arthritis
e. Systemic lupus erythematosus
2105. Examination of a patient detects calcinosis cutis, Raynaud syndrome, esophageal motility disorder, sclerodactyly, and telangiectasia. These changes are called CREST syndrome. What disease can be characterized by the described changes?
a. Dermatomyositis
b. Rheumatoid arthritis
c. Systemic lupus erythematosus
d. Gouty arthritis
*e. Systemic scleroderma
2106. Examination of a patient detects calcinosis cutis, Raynaud syndrome, esophageal motility disorder, sclerodactyly, and telangiectasia. These changes are called CREST syndrome. What disease can be characterized by the described changes?
a. Gouty arthritis
b. Rheumatoid arthritis
c. Dermatomyositis
d. Systemic lupus erythematosus
*e. Systemic scleroderma
2107. Examination of a patient detects calcinosis cutis, Raynaud's syndrome, esophageal motility disorder, sclerodactyly, and telangiectasia. These changes are called CREST syndrome. What disease can be characterized by the described changes?
*a. Systemic scleroderma
b. Dermatomyositis
c. Systemic lupus erythematosus
d. Rheumatoid arthritis
e. Gouty arthritis
2108. Examination of a patient detects calcinosis cutis, Raynaud's syndrome, esophageal motility disorder, sclerodactyly, and telangiectasia. These changes are called CREST syndrome. What disease can be characterized by the described changes?
a. Gouty arthritis
b. Systemic lupus erythematosus
c. Dermatomyositis
d. Rheumatoid arthritis
*e. Systemic scleroderma
2109. Examination of a patient detects calcinosis cutis, Raynaud's syndrome, esophageal motility disorder, sclerodactyly, and telangiectasia. These changes are called CREST syndrome. What disease can be characterized by the described changes?
a. Systemic lupus erythematosus
b. Dermatomyositis
*c. Systemic scleroderma
d. Gouty arthritis
e. Rheumatoid arthritis
2110. Examination of a patient detects neck thickening, exophthalmos, fever, and a pulse of 110/min. What hormone levels must be measured in the patient's blood?
*a. Thyroxine
b. Cortisol
c. Sex hormones
d. Catecholamines
e. Insulin
2111. Examination of a patient detects neck thickening, exophthalmos, fever, and a pulse of 110/min. What hormone levels must be measured in the patient's blood?
a. Catecholamines
*b. Thyroxine
c. Insulin
d. Cortisol
e. Sex hormones
2112. Examination of a patient detects neck thickening, exophthalmos, fever, and a pulse of 110/min. What hormone levels must be measured in the patient's blood?
a. Insulin
*b. Thyroxine
c. Catecholamines
d. Cortisol
e. Sex hormones
2113. Examination of a patient revealed increased pyruvate levels in the blood and a decrease in transketolase activity of erythrocytes. What vitamin is deficient in this case, as indicated by these biochemical parameters?
a. Biotin
b. Tocopherol
c. Folic acid
*d. Thiamine
e. Retinol
2114. Examination of a patient revealed increased pyruvate levels in the blood and a decrease in transketolase activity of erythrocytes. What vitamin is deficient in this case, as indicated by these biochemical parameters?
a. Retinol
*b. Thiamine
c. Tocopherol
d. Folic acid
e. Biotin
2115. Examination of a patient revealed increased pyruvate levels in the blood and a decrease in transketolase activity of erythrocytes. What vitamin is deficient in this case, as indicated by these biochemical parameters?
a. Retinol
b. Tocopherol
c. Biotin
d. Folic acid
*e. Thiamine
2116. Examination of a patient shows base metabolism increased by 50%. This change is caused by increased secretion of the following hormone:
*a. Thyroxine
b. Parathormone
c. Prolactin
d. Growth hormone
e. Insulin
2117. Examination of a patient shows base metabolism increased by 50%. This change is caused by increased secretion of the following hormone:
a. Growth hormone
b. Insulin
*c. Thyroxine
d. Prolactin
e. Parathormone
2118. Examination of a patient shows base metabolism increased by 50%. This change is caused by increased secretion of the following hormone:
a. Parathormone
b. Insulin
c. Prolactin
*d. Thyroxine
e. Growth hormone
2119. Examination of a patient who came to the neurological department shows smoothed-out forehead wrinkles, inability to squint the eyes, drooping mouth corner. One cheek ''inflates'' along with breathing. What nerve is damaged in this case?
a. Trigeminal
b. Oculomotor
c. Accessory
*d. Facial
e. Vagus
2120. Examination of a patient who came to the neurological department shows smoothed-out forehead wrinkles, inability to squint the eyes, drooping mouth corner. One cheek ''inflates'' along with breathing. What nerve is damaged in this case?
a. Vagus
b. Accessory
*c. Facial
d. Trigeminal
e. Oculomotor
2121. Examination of a patient who came to the neurological department shows smoothed-out forehead wrinkles, inability to squint the eyes, drooping mouth corner. One cheek ''inflates'' along with breathing. What nerve is damaged in this case?
a. Vagus
b. Oculomotor
c. Trigeminal
*d. Facial
e. Accessory
2122. Examination of a patient with disturbed process of saliva production in the parotid gland shows that the otic ganglion is likely to be damaged. This ganglion is formed by the following nerve:
*a. N. petrosus minor
b. N. hypoglossus
c. N. vagus
d. N. auricularis magnus
e. N. petrosus major
2123. Examination of a patient with disturbed process of saliva production in the parotid gland shows that the otic ganglion is likely to be damaged. This ganglion is formed by the following nerve:
a. N. vagus
*b. N. petrosus minor
c. N. auricularis magnus
d. N. petrosus major
e. N. hypoglossus
2124. Examination of a person with an extremely short stature (dwarfism) detects childish facial features, normal body proportions, and underdeveloped secondary sexual characters. This person has low hormonal activity in the:
a. Posterior lobe of pituitary gland
b. Thymus
c. Thyroid gland
*d. Anterior lobe of pituitary gland
e. Middle lobe of pituitary gland
2125. Examination of a person with an extremely short stature (dwarfism) detects childish facial features, normal body proportions, and underdeveloped secondary sexual characters. This person has low hormonal activity in the:
a. Thyroid gland
b. Posterior lobe of pituitary gland
*c. Anterior lobe of pituitary gland
d. Middle lobe of pituitary gland
e. Thymus
2126. Examination of a person with an extremely short stature (dwarfism) detects childish facial features, normal body proportions, and underdeveloped secondary sexual characters. This person has low hormonal activity in the:
a. Thyroid gland
b. Posterior lobe of pituitary gland
c. Middle lobe of pituitary gland
*d. Anterior lobe of pituitary gland
e. Thymus
2127. Examination of a sick child detected partial absence of lingual papillae on the lateral surface of the tongue. What papillae are affected?
a. Filiform
b. Conoid
c. Fungiform
d. Vallate
*e. Folate
2128. Examination of a sick child detected partial absence of lingual papillae on the lateral surface of the tongue. What papillae are affected?
a. Fungiform
*b. Folate
c. Vallate
d. Filiform
e. Conoid
2129. Examination of a sick child detected partial absence of lingual papillae on the lateral surface of the tongue. What papillae are affected?
a. Fungiform
b. Filiform
c. Vallate
d. Conoid
*e. Folate
2130. Examination of a tooth shows that there is a large cavity in its crown. The floor of the cavity consists of thin layer of softened dentin that separates the cavity from the pulp. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Deep caries
b. Pulpitis
c. Median caries
d. Periodontitis
e. Superficial caries
2131. Examination of a tooth shows that there is a large cavity in its crown. The floor of the cavity consists of thin layer of softened dentin that separates the cavity from the pulp. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Periodontitis
b. Superficial caries
c. Median caries
*d. Deep caries
e. Pulpitis
2132. Examination of a tooth shows that there is a large cavity in its crown. The floor of the cavity consists of thin layer of softened dentin that separates the cavity from the pulp. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Pulpitis
b. Median caries
c. Superficial caries
*d. Deep caries
e. Periodontitis
2133. Examination of a woman detects neck thickening, exophthalmos, and the pulse of 110/min. What additional tests are necessary to make the diagnosis in this case?
*a. Measuring the levels of T3 and T4
b. Ultrasound of the ovaries
c. Tomography of the adrenal glands
d. Glucose challenge test
e. Measuring the blood catecholamine levels
2134. Examination of a woman detects neck thickening, exophthalmos, and the pulse of 110/min. What additional tests are necessary to make the diagnosis in this case?
a. Glucose challenge test
b. Measuring the blood catecholamine levels
c. Tomography of the adrenal glands
*d. Measuring the levels of T3 and T4
e. Ultrasound of the ovaries
2135. Examination of a woman detects neck thickening, exophthalmos, and the pulse of 110/min. What additional tests are necessary to make the diagnosis in this case?
a. Glucose challenge test
b. Ultrasound of the ovaries
*c. Measuring the levels of T3 and T4
d. Tomography of the adrenal glands
e. Measuring the blood catecholamine levels
2136. Examination of histological specimen of oral mucosa reveals non-keratinized stratified squamous epithelium with lymphocyte infiltrations. What structure of oral cavity is the most likely to be represented by this mucosa specimen?
a. Gums
*b. Tonsil
c. Lip
d. Hard palate
e. Cheek
2137. Examination of histological specimen of oral mucosa reveals non-keratinized stratified squamous epithelium with lymphocyte infiltrations. What structure of oral cavity is the most likely to be represented by this mucosa specimen?
a. Lip
b. Hard palate
*c. Tonsil
d. Cheek
e. Gums
2138. Examination of histological specimen of oral mucosa reveals non-keratinized stratified squamous epithelium with lymphocyte infiltrations. What structure of oral cavity is the most likely to be represented by this mucosa specimen?
a. Lip
b. Hard palate
c. Gums
d. Cheek
*e. Tonsil
2139. Examination of the epithelial cells from the buccal mucosa of a man detected that the majority of cell nuclei contain one Barr body. What syndrome can be characterized by these findings?
a. Down syndrome
*b. Klinefelter syndrome
c. Edwards syndrome
d. Turner syndrome
e. Patau syndrome
2140. Examination of the epithelial cells from the buccal mucosa of a man detected that the majority of cell nuclei contain one Barr body. What syndrome can be characterized by these findings?
a. Edwards syndrome
*b. Klinefelter syndrome
c. Patau syndrome
d. Turner syndrome
e. Down syndrome
2141. Examination of the epithelial cells from the buccal mucosa of a man detected that the majority of cell nuclei contain one Barr body. What syndrome can be characterized by these findings?
a. Turner syndrome
b. Down syndrome
c. Edwards syndrome
d. Patau syndrome
*e. Klinefelter syndrome
2142. Examination of the femur detected suppurative inflammation of compact bone substance and bone marrow with formation of sequestra. What disease causes such changes?
a. Multiple myeloma
b. Giant cell tumor of bone
*c. Osteomyelitis
d. Reticulosarcoma
e. Periostitis
2143. Examination of the femur detected suppurative inflammation of compact bone substance and bone marrow with formation of sequestra. What disease causes such changes?
a. Periostitis
b. Reticulosarcoma
*c. Osteomyelitis
d. Giant cell tumor of bone
e. Multiple myeloma
2144. Examination of the femur detected suppurative inflammation of compact bone substance and bone marrow with formation of sequestra. What disease causes such changes?
a. Reticulosarcoma
b. Giant cell tumor of bone
*c. Osteomyelitis
d. Periostitis
e. Multiple myeloma
2145. Examination of the oral cavity detects enamel damage in the form of isolated and multiple erosions of various shapes and varying in color from yellow-brown to black. The teeth are fragile, some of them are destroyed. What disease corresponds with such pathological changes?
a. Enamel atrophy
*b. Fluorosis
c. Median caries
d. Dental erosions
e. Deep caries
2146. Examination of the oral cavity detects enamel damage in the form of isolated and multiple erosions of various shapes and varying in color from yellow-brown to black. The teeth are fragile, some of them are destroyed. What disease corresponds with such pathological changes?
a. Enamel atrophy
b. Dental erosions
c. Deep caries
*d. Fluorosis
e. Median caries
2147. Examination of the oral cavity detects enamel damage in the form of isolated and multiple erosions of various shapes and varying in color from yellow-brown to black. The teeth are fragile, some of them are destroyed. What disease corresponds with such pathological changes?
a. Median caries
b. Enamel atrophy
c. Dental erosions
d. Deep caries
*e. Fluorosis
2148. Examination of the oral cavity of a patient with AIDS detected deposits of gray-white caseous inflammatory films on the oral mucosa. The films consist of microorganisms mixed with fibrinopurulent exudate. What pathological process has developed in the oral cavity of this patient?
*a. Oral candidiasis
b. Squamous cell carcinoma
c. Leukoplakia
d. Ulcer
e. Gingivitis
2149. Examination of the oral cavity of a patient with AIDS detected deposits of gray-white caseous inflammatory films on the oral mucosa. The films consist of microorganisms mixed with fibrinopurulent exudate. What pathological process has developed in the oral cavity of this patient?
a. Gingivitis
*b. Oral candidiasis
c. Squamous cell carcinoma
d. Leukoplakia
e. Ulcer
2150. Examination of the oral cavity of a patient with AIDS detected deposits of gray-white caseous inflammatory films on the oral mucosa. The films consist of microorganisms mixed with fibrinopurulent exudate. What pathological process has developed in the oral cavity of this patient?
a. Squamous cell carcinoma
*b. Oral candidiasis
c. Leukoplakia
d. Ulcer
e. Gingivitis
2151. Examination of the oral cavity revealed dark yellow and brown spots on the labial and lingual surfaces of the teeth. The spots cover more than half of the dental surface. Dentin and enamel are destroyed. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Fluorosis
b. Cuneiform defects
c. Caries of enamel
d. Dental erosion
e. Deep caries
2152. Examination of the oral cavity revealed dark yellow and brown spots on the labial and lingual surfaces of the teeth. The spots cover more than half of the dental surface. Dentin and enamel are destroyed. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Fluorosis
b. Deep caries
c. Dental erosion
d. Cuneiform defects
e. Caries of enamel
2153. Examination of the oral cavity revealed dark yellow and brown spots on the labial and lingual surfaces of the teeth. The spots cover more than half of the dental surface. Dentin and enamel are destroyed. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Cuneiform defects
b. Caries of enamel
*c. Fluorosis
d. Deep caries
e. Dental erosion
2154. Examination of the oral cavity shows that gingival mucosa of the upper jaw is reddish, has signs of edema, and slightly bleeds, with the damage localized primarily at the interdental areas. What diagnosis is likely in this case?
a. Local parodontitis
*b. Catarrhal gingivitis
c. Hypertrophic gingivitis
d. Ulcerative gingivitis
e. Parodontosis
2155. Examination of the oral cavity shows that gingival mucosa of the upper jaw is reddish, has signs of edema, and slightly bleeds, with the damage localized primarily at the interdental areas. What diagnosis is likely in this case?
a. Parodontosis
*b. Catarrhal gingivitis
c. Hypertrophic gingivitis
d. Local parodontitis
e. Ulcerative gingivitis
2156. Examination of the oral cavity shows that gingival mucosa of the upper jaw is reddish, has signs of edema, and slightly bleeds, with the damage localized primarily at the interdental areas. What diagnosis is likely in this case?
a. Parodontosis
b. Ulcerative gingivitis
c. Local parodontitis
d. Hypertrophic gingivitis
*e. Catarrhal gingivitis
2157. Examination of the patient shows that the patient's tongue cannot be moved forward (the patient cannot stick his tongue out). What muscle is damaged?
a. Longitudinal muscle of the tongue
b. Transverse muscle of the tongue
*c. Genioglossal muscle
d. Stylohyoid muscle
e. Hyoglossal muscle
2158. Examination of the patient shows that the patient's tongue cannot be moved forward (the patient cannot stick his tongue out). What muscle is damaged?
a. Longitudinal muscle of the tongue
b. Transverse muscle of the tongue
c. Hyoglossal muscle
*d. Genioglossal muscle
e. Stylohyoid muscle
2159. Examination of the patient shows that the patient's tongue cannot be moved forward (the patient cannot stick his tongue out). What muscle is damaged?
a. Stylohyoid muscle
b. Transverse muscle of the tongue
*c. Genioglossal muscle
d. Hyoglossal muscle
e. Longitudinal muscle of the tongue
2160. Examination of the patient's oral cavity shows a contact between the cutting edges of the upper and lower incisors. This type of teeth placement is characteristic of:
*a. Orthogenic occlusion
b. Progenia
c. Closed occlusion
d. Biprognathic occlusion
e. Orthognathia
2161. Examination of the patient's oral cavity shows a contact between the cutting edges of the upper and lower incisors. This type of teeth placement is characteristic of:
a. Orthognathia
b. Progenia
c. Biprognathic occlusion
*d. Orthogenic occlusion
e. Closed occlusion
2162. Examination of the patient's oral cavity shows a contact between the cutting edges of the upper and lower incisors. This type of teeth placement is characteristic of:
a. Progenia
*b. Orthogenic occlusion
c. Closed occlusion
d. Orthognathia
e. Biprognathic occlusion
2163. Examination revealed a carious cavity on the masticatory surface of the patient's first upper left molar. The cavity has a conic shape, with its apex pointing towards the dental root. Between the cavity and the pulp there are areas of softened, transparent, and replacement dentin. What stage of caries was detected in the patient?
a. Acute superficial caries
b. Chronic superficial caries
c. Acute deep caries
d. Initial caries
*e. Acute median caries
2164. Examination revealed a carious cavity on the masticatory surface of the patient's first upper left molar. The cavity has a conic shape, with its apex pointing towards the dental root. Between the cavity and the pulp there are areas of softened, transparent, and replacement dentin. What stage of caries was detected in the patient?
a. Initial caries
b. Acute deep caries
c. Acute superficial caries
*d. Acute median caries
e. Chronic superficial caries
2165. Examination revealed a carious cavity on the masticatory surface of the patient's first upper left molar. The cavity has a conic shape, with its apex pointing towards the dental root. Between the cavity and the pulp there are areas of softened, transparent, and replacement dentin. What stage of caries was detected in the patient?
a. Initial caries
b. Acute superficial caries
c. Acute deep caries
d. Chronic superficial caries
*e. Acute median caries
2166. Examination revealed the patient to have decreased secretory function of the nasal cavity glands.What nerve provides parasympathetic innervation of these glands?
*a. N. petrosus major
b. N. maxillaris
c. N. chorda tympani
d. N. petrosus minor
e. N. petrosus profundus
2167. Examination revealed the patient to have decreased secretory function of the nasal cavity glands.What nerve provides parasympathetic innervation of these glands?
a. N. petrosus minor
b. N. maxillaris
c. N. petrosus profundus
*d. N. petrosus major
e. N. chorda tympani
2168. Examination revealed the patient to have decreased secretory function of the nasal cavity glands.What nerve provides parasympathetic innervation of these glands?
a. N. petrosus minor
b. N. petrosus profundus
c. N. maxillaris
*d. N. petrosus major
e. N. chorda tympani
2169. Examination shows that the patient has disturbed secretory function of a parotid gland due to pathology of the nerve that carries parasympathetic postganglionic nerve fibers from the otic ganglion to the affected gland. What nerve is it?
*a. N. auriculotemporalis
b. N. petrosus major
c. N. lingualis
d. N. buccalis
e. N. facialis
2170. Examination shows that the patient has disturbed secretory function of a parotid gland due to pathology of the nerve that carries parasympathetic postganglionic nerve fibers from the otic ganglion to the affected gland. What nerve is it?
a. N. facialis
*b. N. auriculotemporalis
c. N. petrosus major
d. N. buccalis
e. N. lingualis
2171. Examination shows that the patient has disturbed secretory function of a parotid gland due to pathology of the nerve that carries parasympathetic postganglionic nerve fibers from the otic ganglion to the affected gland. What nerve is it?
a. N. petrosus major
*b. N. auriculotemporalis
c. N. facialis
d. N. lingualis
e. N. buccalis
2172. Examination shows that tooth 47 touches a deep defect in the patient's buccal mucosa. The margins of the defect are dense and clear, the floor of the defect is gray. Microscopy of the biopsy material obtained from the wall of the defect detected a purulent exudate on the floor of the defect. Under the exudate there is an area of necrotized tissue with underlying granulation tissue that transforms into mature fibrous tissue. What pathology has developed in the patient's cheek?
a. Chronic erosion
*b. Chronic ulcer
c. Acute ulcer
d. Cancer
e. Acute erosion
2173. Examination shows that tooth 47 touches a deep defect in the patient's buccal mucosa. The margins of the defect are dense and clear, the floor of the defect is gray. Microscopy of the biopsy material obtained from the wall of the defect detected a purulent exudate on the floor of the defect. Under the exudate there is an area of necrotized tissue with underlying granulation tissue that transforms into mature fibrous tissue. What pathology has developed in the patient's cheek?
a. Chronic erosion
b. Acute erosion
c. Acute ulcer
d. Cancer
*e. Chronic ulcer
2174. Examination shows that tooth 47 touches a deep defect in the patient's buccal mucosa. The margins of the defect are dense and clear, the floor of the defect is gray. Microscopy of the biopsy material obtained from the wall of the defect detected a purulent exudate on the floor of the defect. Under the exudate there is an area of necrotized tissue with underlying granulation tissue that transforms into mature fibrous tissue. What pathology has developed in the patient's cheek?
a. Chronic erosion
b. Cancer
c. Acute ulcer
*d. Chronic ulcer
e. Acute erosion
2175. Fatigability of masticatory muscles can result in their abnormally slow relaxation, which impairs mechanical processing of food. Name this condition:
a. Hypodynamia
*b. Contracture
c. Tetanus
d. Galvanism
e. Galvanization
2176. Fatigability of masticatory muscles can result in their abnormally slow relaxation, which impairs mechanical processing of food. Name this condition:
a. Tetanus
*b. Contracture
c. Hypodynamia
d. Galvanism
e. Galvanization
2177. Fatigability of masticatory muscles can result in their abnormally slow relaxation, which impairs mechanical processing of food. Name this condition:
a. Tetanus
b. Hypodynamia
c. Galvanism
d. Galvanization
*e. Contracture
2178. Fetal malformations can be caused by such maternal diseases as rubella, syphilis, toxoplasmosis, cytomegaly, herpes, and chlamydiosis. These malformations belong to the following type of variability:
a. Combinative
*b. Modification
c. Mutational
d. Genomic imprinting
e. Epimutational
2179. Fetal malformations can be caused by such maternal diseases as rubella, syphilis, toxoplasmosis, cytomegaly, herpes, and chlamydiosis. These malformations belong to the following type of variability:
a. Combinative
b. Genomic imprinting
c. Epimutational
d. Mutational
*e. Modification
2180. Fetal malformations can be caused by such maternal diseases as rubella, syphilis, toxoplasmosis, cytomegaly, herpes, and chlamydiosis. These malformations belong to the following type of variability:
a. Genomic imprinting
b. Combinative
c. Mutational
*d. Modification
e. Epimutational
2181. Fibrocartilaginous layer of trachea consists of C-shaped hyaline cartilage rings, with their open ends facing posteriorly. What tissue connects these open ends?
*a. Smooth muscular tissue
b. Striated muscular tissue
c. Adipose connective tissue
d. Dense unformed connective tissue
e. Loose fibrous connective tissue
2182. Fibrocartilaginous layer of trachea consists of C-shaped hyaline cartilage rings, with their open ends facing posteriorly. What tissue connects these open ends?
a. Loose fibrous connective tissue
*b. Smooth muscular tissue
c. Adipose connective tissue
d. Dense unformed connective tissue
e. Striated muscular tissue
2183. Fibrocartilaginous layer of trachea consists of C-shaped hyaline cartilage rings, with their open ends facing posteriorly. What tissue connects these open ends?
a. Loose fibrous connective tissue
b. Dense unformed connective tissue
*c. Smooth muscular tissue
d. Striated muscular tissue
e. Adipose connective tissue
2184. Fluorination is one of the main methods for improvement of enamel resistance. The mechanism of fluorine anti-caries action is based on:
a. -
*b. Fluorapatite synthesis
c. Chlorapatite synthesis
d. Tooth demineralization
e. Hydroxyapatite synthesis
2185. Fluorination is one of the main methods for improvement of enamel resistance. The mechanism of fluorine anti-caries action is based on:
a. Chlorapatite synthesis
*b. Fluorapatite synthesis
c. Hydroxyapatite synthesis
d. -
e. Tooth demineralization
2186. Fluorination is one of the main methods for improvement of enamel resistance. The mechanism of fluorine anti-caries action is based on:
a. Chlorapatite synthesis
b. Tooth demineralization
c. Hydroxyapatite synthesis
*d. Fluorapatite synthesis
e. -
2187. Folding is a post-translational modification of a protein. What is the mechanism of pepsin folding in the chief cells of the gastric mucosa?
*a. Partial proteolysis
b. Acetylation
c. Phosphorylation
d. Covalent modification
e. Methylation
2188. Folding is a post-translational modification of a protein. What is the mechanism of pepsin folding in the chief cells of the gastric mucosa?
a. Acetylation
*b. Partial proteolysis
c. Covalent modification
d. Phosphorylation
e. Methylation
2189. Folding is a post-translational modification of a protein. What is the mechanism of pepsin folding in the chief cells of the gastric mucosa?
a. Covalent modification
*b. Partial proteolysis
c. Methylation
d. Phosphorylation
e. Acetylation
2190. For a rapid relief of hypertensive crisis, a 65-year-old man was prescribed a drug that suppresses the reabsorption of sodium chloride in the thick segment of the ascending limb of the loop of Henle and has marked diuretic effect. Name this drug:
a. Spironolactone
*b. Furosemide
c. Hydrochlorothiazide
d. Mannitol
e. Triamterene
2191. For a rapid relief of hypertensive crisis, a 65-year-old man was prescribed a drug that suppresses the reabsorption of sodium chloride in the thick segment of the ascending limb of the loop of Henle and has marked diuretic effect. Name this drug:
a. Spironolactone
b. Mannitol
c. Hydrochlorothiazide
*d. Furosemide
e. Triamterene
2192. For a rapid relief of hypertensive crisis, a 65-year-old man was prescribed a drug that suppresses the reabsorption of sodium chloride in the thick segment of the ascending limb of the loop of Henle and has marked diuretic effect. Name this drug:
a. Triamterene
b. Spironolactone
c. Hydrochlorothiazide
*d. Furosemide
e. Mannitol
2193. For a surgery in the maxillofacial area, cholinergic agents are used to decrease salivation. What drug of those listed below would you recommend for this purpose?
*a. Atropine sulfate
b. Adrenaline hydrochloride
c. Proserin
d. Lobeline hydrochloride
e. Dithylinum (Suxamethonium chloride)
2194. For a surgery in the maxillofacial area, cholinergic agents are used to decrease salivation. What drug of those listed below would you recommend for this purpose?
a. Adrenaline hydrochloride
b. Proserin
*c. Atropine sulfate
d. Lobeline hydrochloride
e. Dithylinum (Suxamethonium chloride)
2195. For a surgery in the maxillofacial area, cholinergic agents are used to decrease salivation. What drug of those listed below would you recommend for this purpose?
a. Proserin
b. Lobeline hydrochloride
c. Dithylinum (Suxamethonium chloride)
d. Adrenaline hydrochloride
*e. Atropine sulfate
2196. For differential diagnostics of meningitis, cerebrospinal fluid needs to be analyzed. Where is it safe to conduct a lumbar puncture?
a. L1-L2
*b. L3-L4
c. L4-L5
d. L5-S1
e. Th12-L1
2197. For differential diagnostics of meningitis, cerebrospinal fluid needs to be analyzed. Where is it safe to conduct a lumbar puncture?
a. Th12-L1
b. L4-L5
*c. L3-L4
d. L1-L2
e. L5-S1
2198. For differential diagnostics of meningitis, cerebrospinal fluid needs to be analyzed. Where is it safe to conduct a lumbar puncture?
a. Th12-L1
b. L5-S1
c. L4-L5
*d. L3-L4
e. L1-L2
2199. For the treatment of gingivitis, a dentist prescribed the patient a drug with an antiprotozoal and antibacterial effect, which can cause an aversion to alcohol. What drug did the doctor prescribe?
a. Ceftriaxone
*b. Metronidazole
c. Tetracycline
d. Levomycetin (Chloramphenicol)
e. Lincomycin hydrochloride
2200. For the treatment of gingivitis, a dentist prescribed the patient a drug with an antiprotozoal and antibacterial effect, which can cause an aversion to alcohol. What drug did the doctor prescribe?
a. Ceftriaxone
b. Lincomycin hydrochloride
c. Levomycetin (Chloramphenicol)
*d. Metronidazole
e. Tetracycline
2201. For the treatment of gingivitis, a dentist prescribed the patient a drug with an antiprotozoal and antibacterial effect, which can cause an aversion to alcohol. What drug did the doctor prescribe?
a. Tetracycline
b. Levomycetin (Chloramphenicol)
c. Lincomycin hydrochloride
d. Ceftriaxone
*e. Metronidazole
2202. For the treatment of gingivitis, the dentist prescribed the patient a drug with an antiprotozoal and antibacterial effect. This drug can cause an aversion to alcohol. What drug was prescribed by the dentist?
*a. Metronidazole
b. Lincomycin hydrochloride
c. Ceftriaxone
d. Tetracycline
e. Levomycetin (Chloramphenicol)
2203. For the treatment of gingivitis, the dentist prescribed the patient a drug with an antiprotozoal and antibacterial effect. This drug can cause an aversion to alcohol. What drug was prescribed by the dentist?
a. Ceftriaxone
b. Levomycetin (Chloramphenicol)
*c. Metronidazole
d. Tetracycline
e. Lincomycin hydrochloride
2204. For the treatment of gingivitis, the dentist prescribed the patient a drug with an antiprotozoal and antibacterial effect. This drug can cause an aversion to alcohol. What drug was prescribed by the dentist?
a. Levomycetin (Chloramphenicol)
b. Tetracycline
c. Ceftriaxone
d. Lincomycin hydrochloride
*e. Metronidazole
2205. For two weeks a woman has been taking the mixture for neurasthenia, which was prescribed by a neurologist. Her general state slightly improved but shortly she started complaining of rhinitis, conjunctivitis, skin rashes, fatigue, and memory impairment. What group of drugs can have such a side effect?
a. Adaptogens
b. Motherwort preparations
c. Hop preparations
d. Valerian preparations
*e. Bromine salts
2206. For two weeks a woman has been taking the mixture for neurasthenia, which was prescribed by a neurologist. Her general state slightly improved but shortly she started complaining of rhinitis, conjunctivitis, skin rashes, fatigue, and memory impairment. What group of drugs can have such a side effect?
a. Hop preparations
b. Adaptogens
*c. Bromine salts
d. Motherwort preparations
e. Valerian preparations
2207. For two weeks a woman has been taking the mixture for neurasthenia, which was prescribed by a neurologist. Her general state slightly improved but shortly she started complaining of rhinitis, conjunctivitis, skin rashes, fatigue, and memory impairment. What group of drugs can have such a side effect?
a. Hop preparations
b. Motherwort preparations
*c. Bromine salts
d. Valerian preparations
e. Adaptogens
2208. Formation of a large amount of immunoglobulins with various antigen specificity from a small number of genes occurs due to:
a. Deletion
b. Translocation
c. Transcription
d. Replication
*e. Recombination
2209. Formation of a large amount of immunoglobulins with various antigen specificity from a small number of genes occurs due to:
a. Transcription
b. Deletion
*c. Recombination
d. Replication
e. Translocation
2210. Formation of a large amount of immunoglobulins with various antigen specificity from a small number of genes occurs due to:
a. Transcription
b. Replication
c. Deletion
*d. Recombination
e. Translocation
2211. Formation of dental bone tissue requires calcium. The active form of vitamin D plays a large role in calcium metabolism and is produced in:
a. Intestine and liver
*b. Kidneys and liver
c. Stomach and heart
d. Kidneys and heart
e. Liver and muscles
2212. Formation of dental bone tissue requires calcium. The active form of vitamin D plays a large role in calcium metabolism and is produced in:
a. Intestine and liver
b. Stomach and heart
c. Kidneys and heart
*d. Kidneys and liver
e. Liver and muscles
2213. Formation of dental bone tissue requires calcium. The active form of vitamin D plays a large role in calcium metabolism and is produced in:
a. Kidneys and heart
b. Liver and muscles
c. Intestine and liver
*d. Kidneys and liver
e. Stomach and heart
2214. Gastroscopy of a patient revealed the lack of mucus in the coating of the mucous membrane. This can be caused by the dysfunction of the following cells of the gastric wall:
*a. Cells of prismatic glandular epithelium
b. Endocrinocytes
c. Parietal cells of gastric glands
d. Main exocrinocytes
e. Cervical cells
2215. Gastroscopy of a patient revealed the lack of mucus in the coating of the mucous membrane. This can be caused by the dysfunction of the following cells of the gastric wall:
*a. Cells of prismatic glandular epithelium
b. Parietal cells of gastric glands
c. Endocrinocytes
d. Cervical cells
e. Main exocrinocytes
2216. Gastroscopy of a patient revealed the lack of mucus in the coating of the mucous membrane. This can be caused by the dysfunction of the following cells of the gastric wall:
a. Endocrinocytes
b. Parietal cells of gastric glands
c. Cervical cells
d. Main exocrinocytes
*e. Cells of prismatic glandular epithelium
2217. Gene expression is regulated by various mechanisms and activates upon induction of certain DNA regions. Name these regions.
a. Attenuator
*b. Enhancer
c. Terminator
d. Spacer
e. Silencer
2218. Gene expression is regulated by various mechanisms and activates upon induction of certain DNA regions. Name these regions.
a. Terminator
*b. Enhancer
c. Silencer
d. Attenuator
e. Spacer
2219. Gene expression is regulated by various mechanisms and activates upon induction of certain DNA regions. Name these regions.
a. Terminator
*b. Enhancer
c. Spacer
d. Silencer
e. Attenuator
2220. Genetic defects of certain urea-biosynthesis enzymes cause accumulation of free ammonia in the blood and tissues. What organ is most sensitive to hyperammonemia?
a. Heart
b. Kidneys
c. Liver
*d. Brain
e. Intestine
2221. Genetic defects of certain urea-biosynthesis enzymes cause accumulation of free ammonia in the blood and tissues. What organ is most sensitive to hyperammonemia?
a. Kidneys
*b. Brain
c. Intestine
d. Liver
e. Heart
2222. Genetic defects of certain urea-biosynthesis enzymes cause accumulation of free ammonia in the blood and tissues. What organ is most sensitive to hyperammonemia?
a. Kidneys
b. Liver
c. Intestine
d. Heart
*e. Brain
2223. Global warming is one of the most concerning ecological problems for the humanity. One of the causes of climate change is the greenhouse effect, which is associated with:
a. Decreased carbon dioxide levels in the atmosphere
*b. Increased carbon dioxide levels in the atmosphere
c. Development of ozone holes
d. Decreased oxygen levels in the atmosphere
e. Increased levels of sulfur oxides in the atmosphere
2224. Global warming is one of the most concerning ecological problems for the humanity. One of the causes of climate change is the greenhouse effect, which is associated with:
a. Decreased oxygen levels in the atmosphere
b. Development of ozone holes
c. Decreased carbon dioxide levels in the atmosphere
d. Increased levels of sulfur oxides in the atmosphere
*e. Increased carbon dioxide levels in the atmosphere
2225. Global warming is one of the most concerning ecological problems for the humanity. One of the causes of climate change is the greenhouse effect, which is associated with:
a. Decreased oxygen levels in the atmosphere
b. Increased levels of sulfur oxides in the atmosphere
c. Decreased carbon dioxide levels in the atmosphere
*d. Increased carbon dioxide levels in the atmosphere
e. Development of ozone holes
2226. Glucose synthesis from non-carbohydrate components is an important biochemical process. Gluconeogenesis from amino acids occurs most actively if a diet is rich in proteins. Which amino acid of those listed below is the most glucogenic?
*a. Alanine
b. Lysine
c. Leucine
d. Isoleucine
e. Valine
2227. Glucose synthesis from non-carbohydrate components is an important biochemical process. Gluconeogenesis from amino acids occurs most actively if a diet is rich in proteins. Which amino acid of those listed below is the most glucogenic?
a. Lysine
b. Isoleucine
*c. Alanine
d. Valine
e. Leucine
2228. Glucose synthesis from non-carbohydrate components is an important biochemical process. Gluconeogenesis from amino acids occurs most actively if a diet is rich in proteins. Which amino acid of those listed below is the most glucogenic?
a. Valine
*b. Alanine
c. Leucine
d. Isoleucine
e. Lysine
2229. Glucosuria develops because of impaired renal function. What pathological process can cause the development of glucosuria?
*a. Decreased glucose reabsorption in the  proximal tubules
b. Decreased glucose reabsorption in the  distal tubules
c. Increased tubular secretion of glucose
d. Increased glucose filtration in the  glomeruli
e. Decreased glucose filtration in the  glomeruli
2230. Glucosuria develops because of impaired renal function. What pathological process can cause the development of glucosuria?
a. Decreased glucose filtration in the  glomeruli
*b. Decreased glucose reabsorption in the  proximal tubules
c. Increased glucose filtration in the  glomeruli
d. Decreased glucose reabsorption in the  distal tubules
e. Increased tubular secretion of glucose
2231. Glucosuria develops because of impaired renal function. What pathological process can cause the development of glucosuria?
a. Increased glucose filtration in the  glomeruli
b. Decreased glucose reabsorption in the  distal tubules
c. Decreased glucose filtration in the  glomeruli
d. Increased tubular secretion of glucose
*e. Decreased glucose reabsorption in the  proximal tubules
2232. Glutamate decarboxylation produces an inhibitory neurotransmitter in the central nervous system. What neurotransmitter is it?
*a. GABA
b. Histamine
c. Serotonin
d. Glutathione
e. Asparagine
2233. Glutamate decarboxylation produces an inhibitory neurotransmitter in the central nervous system. What neurotransmitter is it?
a. Serotonin
b. Histamine
c. Asparagine
*d. GABA
e. Glutathione
2234. Glutamate decarboxylation produces an inhibitory neurotransmitter in the central nervous system. What neurotransmitter is it?
a. Serotonin
b. Histamine
c. Glutathione
*d. GABA
e. Asparagine
2235. Heart auscultation detected a systolic murmur in the II intercostal space on the left parasternal line. In this case, the doctor was able to auscultate a pathology of the:
a. Aortic valve
*b. Valve of the pulmonary trunk
c. Valve of the superior vena cava
d. Tricuspid valve
e. Bicuspid valve
2236. Heart auscultation detected a systolic murmur in the II intercostal space on the left parasternal line. In this case, the doctor was able to auscultate a pathology of the:
a. Aortic valve
b. Bicuspid valve
*c. Valve of the pulmonary trunk
d. Valve of the superior vena cava
e. Tricuspid valve
2237. Heart auscultation detected a systolic murmur in the II intercostal space on the left parasternal line. In this case, the doctor was able to auscultate a pathology of the:
a. Valve of the superior vena cava
b. Aortic valve
c. Bicuspid valve
*d. Valve of the pulmonary trunk
e. Tricuspid valve
2238. Heart auscultation revealed a split first heart sound over the base of the xiphoid process. In this case, the doctor was auscultating the pathology of the following valve:
a. Bicuspid valve
b. Aortic valve
*c. Tricuspid valve
d. Valve of the superior vena cava
e. Pulmonary valve
2239. Heart auscultation revealed a split first heart sound over the base of the xiphoid process. In this case, the doctor was auscultating the pathology of the following valve:
a. Pulmonary valve
b. Aortic valve
c. Valve of the superior vena cava
*d. Tricuspid valve
e. Bicuspid valve
2240. Heart auscultation revealed a split first heart sound over the base of the xiphoid process. In this case, the doctor was auscultating the pathology of the following valve:
a. Valve of the superior vena cava
b. Aortic valve
c. Pulmonary valve
d. Bicuspid valve
*e. Tricuspid valve
2241. Histologic specimen of endometrium demonstrates isolated epithelial cells with chromosomes that form a ''plate'' located in the equatorial plane of the cell. What stage of the cell cycle is it?
*a. Metaphase
b. Anaphase
c. Telophase
d. Prophase
e. Interphase
2242. Histologic specimen of endometrium demonstrates isolated epithelial cells with chromosomes that form a ''plate'' located in the equatorial plane of the cell. What stage of the cell cycle is it?
a. Anaphase
b. Interphase
c. Telophase
*d. Metaphase
e. Prophase
2243. Histologic specimen of endometrium demonstrates isolated epithelial cells with chromosomes that form a ''plate'' located in the equatorial plane of the cell. What stage of the cell cycle is it?
a. Telophase
*b. Metaphase
c. Anaphase
d. Interphase
e. Prophase
2244. Histologic specimen of renal cortex shows renal corpuscle and renal tubules. It is known that reabsorption of substances occurs in the renal tubules. What nephron tissue takes part in this process?
a. Cartilaginous tissue
b. Mucous tissue
c. Reticular tissue
*d. Epithelial tissue
e. Connective tissue proper
2245. Histologic specimen of renal cortex shows renal corpuscle and renal tubules. It is known that reabsorption of substances occurs in the renal tubules. What nephron tissue takes part in this process?
a. Connective tissue proper
b. Reticular tissue
c. Cartilaginous tissue
*d. Epithelial tissue
e. Mucous tissue
2246. Histologic specimen of renal cortex shows renal corpuscle and renal tubules. It is known that reabsorption of substances occurs in the renal tubules. What nephron tissue takes part in this process?
a. Reticular tissue
b. Mucous tissue
c. Cartilaginous tissue
*d. Epithelial tissue
e. Connective tissue proper
2247. Histological examination of the mandibular bone shows a tumor consisting of fibrous tissue that surrounds basophilic cement-like foci of varying size. Make the diagnosis, what kind of tumor it is:
a. Cementoblastoma
*b. Cemento-ossifying fibroma
c. Cementoma
d. Giant cementoma
e. Odontogenic fibroma
2248. Histological examination of the mandibular bone shows a tumor consisting of fibrous tissue that surrounds basophilic cement-like foci of varying size. Make the diagnosis, what kind of tumor it is:
a. Cementoma
*b. Cemento-ossifying fibroma
c. Cementoblastoma
d. Giant cementoma
e. Odontogenic fibroma
2249. Histological examination of the mandibular bone shows a tumor consisting of fibrous tissue that surrounds basophilic cement-like foci of varying size. Make the diagnosis, what kind of tumor it is:
a. Cementoma
b. Cementoblastoma
*c. Cemento-ossifying fibroma
d. Giant cementoma
e. Odontogenic fibroma
2250. Histological microslide shows a section of a vessel that can be characterized by regular round shape. The vessel is gaping; its wall consists of 3 layers. The middle layer is fenestrated with 30-40 elastic membranes. What vessel is exhibited in the microslide?
a. Blood capillary
b. Muscular vein
*c. Elastic artery
d. Mixed type artery
e. Muscular artery
2251. Histological microslide shows a section of a vessel that can be characterized by regular round shape. The vessel is gaping; its wall consists of 3 layers. The middle layer is fenestrated with 30-40 elastic membranes. What vessel is exhibited in the microslide?
a. Blood capillary
b. Muscular vein
*c. Elastic artery
d. Muscular artery
e. Mixed type artery
2252. Histological microslide shows a section of a vessel that can be characterized by regular round shape. The vessel is gaping; its wall consists of 3 layers. The middle layer is fenestrated with 30-40 elastic membranes. What vessel is exhibited in the microslide?
a. Muscular artery
*b. Elastic artery
c. Blood capillary
d. Muscular vein
e. Mixed type artery
2253. Histology of a tissue shows that it has no blood vessels and its cells tightly adhere to one another, forming layers. What tissue is it?
a. Bone tissue
b. Muscle tissue
c. Nerve tissue
d. Cartilaginous tissue
*e. Epithelial tissue
2254. Histology of a tissue shows that it has no blood vessels and its cells tightly adhere to one another, forming layers. What tissue is it?
a. Cartilaginous tissue
b. Bone tissue
c. Muscle tissue
*d. Epithelial tissue
e. Nerve tissue
2255. Histology of a tissue shows that it has no blood vessels and its cells tightly adhere to one another, forming layers. What tissue is it?
a. Muscle tissue
b. Bone tissue
c. Cartilaginous tissue
*d. Epithelial tissue
e. Nerve tissue
2256. Histology of an extracted tooth detects a lower number and reduced size of odontoblasts and pulpocytes with sclerosis of the connective tissue base of the pulp. What diagnosis is likely in this case?
a. Pulp dystrophy
b. Pulp hyalinosis
*c. Pulp atrophy
d. Pulp necrosis
e. Acute pulpitis
2257. Histology of an extracted tooth detects a lower number and reduced size of odontoblasts and pulpocytes with sclerosis of the connective tissue base of the pulp. What diagnosis is likely in this case?
a. Pulp dystrophy
b. Pulp necrosis
*c. Pulp atrophy
d. Acute pulpitis
e. Pulp hyalinosis
2258. Histology of an extracted tooth detects a lower number and reduced size of odontoblasts and pulpocytes with sclerosis of the connective tissue base of the pulp. What diagnosis is likely in this case?
a. Pulp necrosis
b. Acute pulpitis
c. Pulp hyalinosis
d. Pulp dystrophy
*e. Pulp atrophy
2259. Histology of the dental pulp shows that the larger part of the dental cavity is filled with connective tissue that contains numerous collagen fibers and cellular infiltrations, consisting predominantly of lymphocytes and plasma cells. Some collagen fibers exhibit signs of hyalinosis and petrified patches can be detected. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Fibrous pulpitis
b. Diffuse purulent pulpitis
c. Gangrenous pulpitis
d. Granulating pulpitis
e. Serous pulpitis
2260. Histology of the dental pulp shows that the larger part of the dental cavity is filled with connective tissue that contains numerous collagen fibers and cellular infiltrations, consisting predominantly of lymphocytes and plasma cells. Some collagen fibers exhibit signs of hyalinosis and petrified patches can be detected. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Diffuse purulent pulpitis
*b. Fibrous pulpitis
c. Gangrenous pulpitis
d. Granulating pulpitis
e. Serous pulpitis
2261. Histology of the dental pulp shows that the larger part of the dental cavity is filled with connective tissue that contains numerous collagen fibers and cellular infiltrations, consisting predominantly of lymphocytes and plasma cells. Some collagen fibers exhibit signs of hyalinosis and petrified patches can be detected. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Serous pulpitis
b. Granulating pulpitis
*c. Fibrous pulpitis
d. Diffuse purulent pulpitis
e. Gangrenous pulpitis
2262. Histology of the heart valves of a patient who died of acute heart failure revealed mucoid edema, fibrinoid changes, sclerosis, and fresh and old thrombi on the obturating edge of the valve. What form of endocarditis is observed in the deceased?
a. Fibroplastic endocarditis
b. -
c. Polypous ulcerative endocarditis
d. Diffuse endocarditis
*e. Recurrent verrucous endocarditis
2263. Histology of the heart valves of a patient who died of acute heart failure revealed mucoid edema, fibrinoid changes, sclerosis, and fresh and old thrombi on the obturating edge of the valve. What form of endocarditis is observed in the deceased?
a. Polypous ulcerative endocarditis
b. -
*c. Recurrent verrucous endocarditis
d. Diffuse endocarditis
e. Fibroplastic endocarditis
2264. Histology of the heart valves of a patient who died of acute heart failure revealed mucoid edema, fibrinoid changes, sclerosis, and fresh and old thrombi on the obturating edge of the valve. What form of endocarditis is observed in the deceased?
a. Polypous ulcerative endocarditis
b. -
c. Fibroplastic endocarditis
*d. Recurrent verrucous endocarditis
e. Diffuse endocarditis
2265. Histology of the internal organs of a deceased woman, who in life was diagnosed with systemic collagenosis, revealed widespread vascular damage in the form of mucoid and fibrinoid swelling, fibrinoid necrosis of arteriolar walls, and perivascular lymphoplasmacytic infiltrations. What type of inflammation can be characterized by these symptoms?
a. -
b. Chronic immune inflammation
c. Granulomatous inflammation
*d. Acute immune inflammation
e. Interstitial diffuse inflammation
2266. Histology of the internal organs of a deceased woman, who in life was diagnosed with systemic collagenosis, revealed widespread vascular damage in the form of mucoid and fibrinoid swelling, fibrinoid necrosis of arteriolar walls, and perivascular lymphoplasmacytic infiltrations. What type of inflammation can be characterized by these symptoms?
a. Granulomatous inflammation
b. Chronic immune inflammation
*c. Acute immune inflammation
d. Interstitial diffuse inflammation
e. -
2267. Histology of the internal organs of a deceased woman, who in life was diagnosed with systemic collagenosis, revealed widespread vascular damage in the form of mucoid and fibrinoid swelling, fibrinoid necrosis of arteriolar walls, and perivascular lymphoplasmacytic infiltrations. What type of inflammation can be characterized by these symptoms?
a. Interstitial diffuse inflammation
b. Granulomatous inflammation
c. -
d. Chronic immune inflammation
*e. Acute immune inflammation
2268. Holocrine secretion is characteristic of sebaceous glands. What structural components ensure renewal of the cells of these glands?
*a. Germinative layer cells
b. Nonstratified cuboidal epithelium of the excretory duct
c. Myoepithelial cells
d. Sebocytes
e. Stratified squamous epithelium of the excretory duct
2269. Holocrine secretion is characteristic of sebaceous glands. What structural components ensure renewal of the cells of these glands?
a. Myoepithelial cells
b. Stratified squamous epithelium of the excretory duct
c. Nonstratified cuboidal epithelium of the excretory duct
d. Sebocytes
*e. Germinative layer cells
2270. Holocrine secretion is characteristic of sebaceous glands. What structural components ensure renewal of the cells of these glands?
a. Nonstratified cuboidal epithelium of the excretory duct
b. Stratified squamous epithelium of the excretory duct
c. Sebocytes
d. Myoepithelial cells
*e. Germinative layer cells
2271. How does pH of venous blood differ from pH of arterial blood and why?
a. Higher, due to O_2 release from the organism
b. Higher, due to higher blood CO_2 levels
*c. Lower, due to higher blood CO_2 levels
d. No difference
e. Lower, due to O_2 release from the organism
2272. How does pH of venous blood differ from pH of arterial blood and why?
a. Higher, due to higher blood CO_2 levels
*b. Lower, due to higher blood CO_2 levels
c. Lower, due to O_2 release from the organism
d. No difference
e. Higher, due to O_2 release from the organism
2273. How does pH of venous blood differ from pH of arterial blood and why?
a. Higher, due to higher blood CO_2 levels
b. No difference
*c. Lower, due to higher blood CO_2 levels
d. Lower, due to O_2 release from the organism
e. Higher, due to O_2 release from the organism
2274. Human teeth are fixed in the special sockets on the upper and lower jaw, which means that they belong to the following system:
a. Heterodont
*b. Thecodont
c. Acrodont
d. Homodont
e. Pleurodont
2275. Human teeth are fixed in the special sockets on the upper and lower jaw, which means that they belong to the following system:
a. Heterodont
b. Homodont
c. Pleurodont
d. Acrodont
*e. Thecodont
2276. Human teeth are fixed in the special sockets on the upper and lower jaw, which means that they belong to the following system:
a. Pleurodont
b. Homodont
c. Heterodont
d. Acrodont
*e. Thecodont
2277. Hyperfunction of the thyroid gland was detected in a 30-year-old patient. What is the shape of thyroid follicular cells?
a. Cuboidal cells
b. Tall prismatic cells with apically located nuclei
*c. Prismatic cells with basally located nuclei
d. Squamous cells
e. Spindle-shaped cells
2278. Hyperfunction of the thyroid gland was detected in a 30-year-old patient. What is the shape of thyroid follicular cells?
a. Squamous cells
*b. Prismatic cells with basally located nuclei
c. Spindle-shaped cells
d. Tall prismatic cells with apically located nuclei
e. Cuboidal cells
2279. Hyperfunction of the thyroid gland was detected in a 30-year-old patient. What is the shape of thyroid follicular cells?
a. Squamous cells
b. Tall prismatic cells with apically located nuclei
c. Spindle-shaped cells
d. Cuboidal cells
*e. Prismatic cells with basally located nuclei
2280. If blood glucose levels exceed 10 mmol/L, the following is observed:
a. -
b. Gluconeogenesis
*c. Glucosuria
d. Anuria
e. Proteinuria
2281. If blood glucose levels exceed 10 mmol/L, the following is observed:
a. -
b. Gluconeogenesis
c. Proteinuria
d. Anuria
*e. Glucosuria
2282. If blood glucose levels exceed 10 mmol/L, the following is observed:
a. Proteinuria
b. Anuria
c. -
*d. Glucosuria
e. Gluconeogenesis
2283. Impaired coordination of movements and disturbed muscle tone are signs of alcohol intoxication. These changes are associated with damage to certain cells in the cerebellum. Name these cells.
*a. Pear-shaped neurons of the Purkinje layer
b. Stellate cells of the molecular layer
c. Basket cells of the granular layer
d. Golgi cells of the granular layer
e. Purkinje cells of the molecular layer
2284. Impaired coordination of movements and disturbed muscle tone are signs of alcohol intoxication. These changes are associated with damage to certain cells in the cerebellum. Name these cells.
a. Stellate cells of the molecular layer
b. Golgi cells of the granular layer
c. Basket cells of the granular layer
d. Purkinje cells of the molecular layer
*e. Pear-shaped neurons of the Purkinje layer
2285. Impaired coordination of movements and disturbed muscle tone are signs of alcohol intoxication. These changes are associated with damage to certain cells in the cerebellum. Name these cells.
a. Stellate cells of the molecular layer
b. Purkinje cells of the molecular layer
c. Golgi cells of the granular layer
d. Basket cells of the granular layer
*e. Pear-shaped neurons of the Purkinje layer
2286. In 8 days after a surgery the patient developed tetanus. The surgeon suspects this condition to be caused by suture material contaminated by tetanus agent. The material is delivered to a bacteriological laboratory. What nutrient medium is required for primary inoculation of the suture material?
*a. Kitt-Tarozzi medium
b. Egg-yolk salt agar
c. Hiss medium
d. Sabouraud agar
e. Endo agar
2287. In 8 days after a surgery the patient developed tetanus. The surgeon suspects this condition to be caused by suture material contaminated by tetanus agent. The material is delivered to a bacteriological laboratory. What nutrient medium is required for primary inoculation of the suture material?
a. Egg-yolk salt agar
b. Sabouraud agar
*c. Kitt-Tarozzi medium
d. Hiss medium
e. Endo agar
2288. In 8 days after a surgery the patient developed tetanus. The surgeon suspects this condition to be caused by suture material contaminated by tetanus agent. The material is delivered to a bacteriological laboratory. What nutrient medium is required for primary inoculation of the suture material?
a. Sabouraud agar
b. Hiss medium
*c. Kitt-Tarozzi medium
d. Egg-yolk salt agar
e. Endo agar
2289. In COVID-19 patients, type II pneumocytes in the lungs are the target cells for coronavirus SarsCov-2. What function of the alveolar epithelium primarily becomes impaired as a result of viral damage to these cells?
a. Gas exchange
b. Additional air purification in the alveoli
*c. Surfactant synthesis
d. Mucus production
e. Surfactant dissolution
2290. In COVID-19 patients, type II pneumocytes in the lungs are the target cells for coronavirus SarsCov-2. What function of the alveolar epithelium primarily becomes impaired as a result of viral damage to these cells?
a. Mucus production
b. Additional air purification in the alveoli
*c. Surfactant synthesis
d. Surfactant dissolution
e. Gas exchange
2291. In COVID-19 patients, type II pneumocytes in the lungs are the target cells for coronavirus SarsCov-2. What function of the alveolar epithelium primarily becomes impaired as a result of viral damage to these cells?
a. Surfactant dissolution
b. Gas exchange
c. Mucus production
*d. Surfactant synthesis
e. Additional air purification in the alveoli
2292. In Western Europe nearly half of all congenital malformations occur in the children conceived in the period, when pesticides were used extensively in the region. Those congenital conditions result from the following influence:
*a. Teratogenic
b. Mechanical
c. Malignization
d. Carcinogenic
e. Mutagenic
2293. In Western Europe nearly half of all congenital malformations occur in the children conceived in the period, when pesticides were used extensively in the region. Those congenital conditions result from the following influence:
a. Mechanical
b. Mutagenic
c. Carcinogenic
d. Malignization
*e. Teratogenic
2294. In Western Europe nearly half of all congenital malformations occur in the children conceived in the period, when pesticides were used extensively in the region. Those congenital conditions result from the following influence:
a. Mutagenic
b. Malignization
*c. Teratogenic
d. Mechanical
e. Carcinogenic
2295. In a 46-year-old man, examination revealed the processes of cartilaginous tissue destruction in the knee joints. What are the specific features of cartilaginous tissue in this location?
*a. It has no perichondrium
b. It has perichondrium
c. It has osteoblasts
d. It has no isogenic groups of osteocytes
e. It has isogenic groups of osteocytes
2296. In a 46-year-old man, examination revealed the processes of cartilaginous tissue destruction in the knee joints. What are the specific features of cartilaginous tissue in this location?
a. It has isogenic groups of osteocytes
b. It has no isogenic groups of osteocytes
*c. It has no perichondrium
d. It has perichondrium
e. It has osteoblasts
2297. In a 46-year-old man, examination revealed the processes of cartilaginous tissue destruction in the knee joints. What are the specific features of cartilaginous tissue in this location?
a. It has perichondrium
b. It has isogenic groups of osteocytes
c. It has no isogenic groups of osteocytes
d. It has osteoblasts
*e. It has no perichondrium
2298. In a 6-year-old child, a dentist detected gray-white spots up to one millimeter in diameter on the buccal mucosa at the level of the premolars. The child was not vaccinated at the age of one year. The doctor suspects that the mucosal lesion was caused by a complex RNA virus with hemagglutinating properties. This virus has no neuraminidase activity and cannot not cultivated in chicken embryos. What pathogen caused the development of this disease?
a. Herpes simplex virus
b. Coxsackievirus A
c. Varicella-zoster virus
*d. Measles virus
e. Mumps virus
2299. In a 6-year-old child, a dentist detected gray-white spots up to one millimeter in diameter on the buccal mucosa at the level of the premolars. The child was not vaccinated at the age of one year. The doctor suspects that the mucosal lesion was caused by a complex RNA virus with hemagglutinating properties. This virus has no neuraminidase activity and cannot not cultivated in chicken embryos. What pathogen caused the development of this disease?
a. Herpes simplex virus
b. Mumps virus
c. Coxsackievirus A
*d. Measles virus
e. Varicella-zoster virus
2300. In a 6-year-old child, a dentist detected gray-white spots up to one millimeter in diameter on the buccal mucosa at the level of the premolars. The child was not vaccinated at the age of one year. The doctor suspects that the mucosal lesion was caused by a complex RNA virus with hemagglutinating properties. This virus has no neuraminidase activity and cannot not cultivated in chicken embryos. What pathogen caused the development of this disease?
a. Varicella-zoster virus
b. Mumps virus
c. Coxsackievirus A
d. Herpes simplex virus
*e. Measles virus
2301. In a 65-year-old man with portal hypertension, the substances that are being neutralized in the liver enter his general bloodstream through portocaval anastomoses. What type of hepatic coma will develop in the patient in this case?
a. Hepatocellular
b. Ketoacidotic
c. Parenchymatous
*d. Shunt
e. Mixed
2302. In a 65-year-old man with portal hypertension, the substances that are being neutralized in the liver enter his general bloodstream through portocaval anastomoses. What type of hepatic coma will develop in the patient in this case?
a. Mixed
b. Ketoacidotic
c. Hepatocellular
*d. Shunt
e. Parenchymatous
2303. In a 65-year-old man with portal hypertension, the substances that are being neutralized in the liver enter his general bloodstream through portocaval anastomoses. What type of hepatic coma will develop in the patient in this case?
a. Parenchymatous
*b. Shunt
c. Ketoacidotic
d. Mixed
e. Hepatocellular
2304. In a car accident, a driver has received multiple traumas to the side of his head, including a zygomatic arch fracture. What muscle will be functionally impaired in this case?
a. M. orbicularis oris
*b. M. masseter
c. M. procerus
d. M. buccinator
e. M. risorius
2305. In a car accident, a driver has received multiple traumas to the side of his head, including a zygomatic arch fracture. What muscle will be functionally impaired in this case?
a. M. orbicularis oris
b. M. buccinator
*c. M. masseter
d. M. procerus
e. M. risorius
2306. In a car accident, a driver has received multiple traumas to the side of his head, including a zygomatic arch fracture. What muscle will be functionally impaired in this case?
a. M. procerus
*b. M. masseter
c. M. buccinator
d. M. risorius
e. M. orbicularis oris
2307. In a closed community it is necessary to determine community members immunity to diphtheria and verify the need for their vaccination. What investigation is necessary in this case?
*a. Determine antitoxin titer by means of indirect hemagglutination assay
b. Determine community members immunity to diphtheria bacillus
c. Check medical records for vaccination
d. Determine diphtheria antibody titer
e. Test community members for diphtheria bacillus carriage
2308. In a closed community it is necessary to determine community members immunity to diphtheria and verify the need for their vaccination. What investigation is necessary in this case?
*a. Determine antitoxin titer by means of indirect hemagglutination assay
b. Test community members for diphtheria bacillus carriage
c. Check medical records for vaccination
d. Determine diphtheria antibody titer
e. Determine community members immunity to diphtheria bacillus
2309. In a closed community it is necessary to determine community members immunity to diphtheria and verify the need for their vaccination. What investigation is necessary in this case?
a. Determine diphtheria antibody titer
*b. Determine antitoxin titer by means of indirect hemagglutination assay
c. Determine community members immunity to diphtheria bacillus
d. Check medical records for vaccination
e. Test community members for diphtheria bacillus carriage
2310. In a patient with chronic hepatitis, tooth extraction was complicated by prolonged bleeding. What is the cause of the hemorrhagic syndrome in this case?
a. Increased fibrinogen synthesis
b. Increased thromboplastin formation
c. Decreased fibrin formation
d. Intensified fibrinolysis
*e. Decreased thrombin formation
2311. In a patient with chronic hepatitis, tooth extraction was complicated by prolonged bleeding. What is the cause of the hemorrhagic syndrome in this case?
a. Increased thromboplastin formation
b. Intensified fibrinolysis
*c. Decreased thrombin formation
d. Decreased fibrin formation
e. Increased fibrinogen synthesis
2312. In a patient with chronic hepatitis, tooth extraction was complicated by prolonged bleeding. What is the cause of the hemorrhagic syndrome in this case?
a. Intensified fibrinolysis
b. Increased fibrinogen synthesis
c. Decreased fibrin formation
*d. Decreased thrombin formation
e. Increased thromboplastin formation
2313. In an adult person, mitosis is not observed in certain cells throughout life and the quantity of DNA in them remains constant. What are these cells called?
a. Hematopoietic cells
b. Epidermal cells
*c. Neurons
d. Smooth muscle cell
e. Endothelial cells
2314. In an adult person, mitosis is not observed in certain cells throughout life and the quantity of DNA in them remains constant. What are these cells called?
a. Smooth muscle cell
*b. Neurons
c. Epidermal cells
d. Hematopoietic cells
e. Endothelial cells
2315. In an adult person, mitosis is not observed in certain cells throughout life and the quantity of DNA in them remains constant. What are these cells called?
a. Smooth muscle cell
b. Endothelial cells
*c. Neurons
d. Epidermal cells
e. Hematopoietic cells
2316. In an experiment a peripheral segment of the sympathetic nerve that innervates the sublingual gland is being stimulated. In this case this gland will produce:
*a. A small amount of viscous saliva
b. No saliva
c. A large amount of viscous saliva
d. A small amount of non-viscous saliva
e. A large amount of non-viscous saliva
2317. In an experiment a peripheral segment of the sympathetic nerve that innervates the sublingual gland is being stimulated. In this case this gland will produce:
a. A large amount of non-viscous saliva
*b. A small amount of viscous saliva
c. No saliva
d. A small amount of non-viscous saliva
e. A large amount of viscous saliva
2318. In an experiment a peripheral segment of the sympathetic nerve that innervates the sublingual gland is being stimulated. In this case this gland will produce:
a. A small amount of non-viscous saliva
b. A large amount of non-viscous saliva
c. A large amount of viscous saliva
d. No saliva
*e. A small amount of viscous saliva
2319. In an experiment on a dog, the role of adrenal glands in the thermoregulation processes was studied. What adrenal hormone constricts the blood vessels, reducing the heat emission?
a. Corticosterone
b. Androgens
c. Cortisone
*d. Adrenaline
e. Estrogens
2320. In an experiment on a dog, the role of adrenal glands in the thermoregulation processes was studied. What adrenal hormone constricts the blood vessels, reducing the heat emission?
a. Estrogens
b. Androgens
*c. Adrenaline
d. Cortisone
e. Corticosterone
2321. In an experiment on a dog, the role of adrenal glands in the thermoregulation processes was studied. What adrenal hormone constricts the blood vessels, reducing the heat emission?
a. Estrogens
b. Corticosterone
c. Cortisone
*d. Adrenaline
e. Androgens
2322. In an experiment the vagus is being stimulated, which results in increased acetylcholine entry to the synaptic cleft, and that in turn results in the decresed heart rate due to the following mechanism:
*a. Hyperpolarization of cardiomyocyte membrane
b. Decrease of action potential duration
c. Increase in AV nodal conduction velocity
d. Depolarization of cardiomyocyte membrane
e. Increase of action potential duration
2323. In an experiment the vagus is being stimulated, which results in increased acetylcholine entry to the synaptic cleft, and that in turn results in the decresed heart rate due to the following mechanism:
a. Depolarization of cardiomyocyte membrane
b. Increase in AV nodal conduction velocity
*c. Hyperpolarization of cardiomyocyte membrane
d. Decrease of action potential duration
e. Increase of action potential duration
2324. In an experiment the vagus is being stimulated, which results in increased acetylcholine entry to the synaptic cleft, and that in turn results in the decresed heart rate due to the following mechanism:
a. Increase in AV nodal conduction velocity
*b. Hyperpolarization of cardiomyocyte membrane
c. Increase of action potential duration
d. Depolarization of cardiomyocyte membrane
e. Decrease of action potential duration
2325. In an experiment, a dog was trained to develop a conditioned reflex in response to a flash of light. For this reflex to occur, a certain part of the cerebral cortex must be intact. What part of the cerebral cortex is it?
*a. Occipital lobe
b. Frontal lobe
c. Temporal lobe
d. Precentral gyrus
e. Postcentral gyrus
2326. In an experiment, a dog was trained to develop a conditioned reflex in response to a flash of light. For this reflex to occur, a certain part of the cerebral cortex must be intact. What part of the cerebral cortex is it?
*a. Occipital lobe
b. Precentral gyrus
c. Temporal lobe
d. Frontal lobe
e. Postcentral gyrus
2327. In an experiment, a dog was trained to develop a conditioned reflex in response to a flash of light. For this reflex to occur, a certain part of the cerebral cortex must be intact. What part of the cerebral cortex is it?
a. Temporal lobe
b. Precentral gyrus
*c. Occipital lobe
d. Frontal lobe
e. Postcentral gyrus
2328. In an experiment, a human cell culture was irradiated with protons. As a result of irradiation, a damage to the nucleoli was observed. Formation of what organelles will be disrupted in this case?
a. Golgi apparatus
*b. Ribosomes
c. Endoplasmic reticulum
d. Microtubules
e. Lysosomes
2329. In an experiment, a human cell culture was irradiated with protons. As a result of irradiation, a damage to the nucleoli was observed. Formation of what organelles will be disrupted in this case?
a. Golgi apparatus
b. Lysosomes
c. Microtubules
d. Endoplasmic reticulum
*e. Ribosomes
2330. In an experiment, a human cell culture was irradiated with protons. As a result of irradiation, a damage to the nucleoli was observed. Formation of what organelles will be disrupted in this case?
a. Microtubules
b. Golgi apparatus
c. Lysosomes
d. Endoplasmic reticulum
*e. Ribosomes
2331. In an experiment, a test animal had a part of its brain destroyed, which caused the animal to change from a homeothermic to a poikilothermic state. What part of the brain was destroyed in this case?
a. Mesencephalon
*b. Hypothalamus
c. Pineal gland
d. Pituitary
e. Medulla oblongata
2332. In an experiment, a test animal had a part of its brain destroyed, which caused the animal to change from a homeothermic to a poikilothermic state. What part of the brain was destroyed in this case?
a. Pineal gland
b. Mesencephalon
*c. Hypothalamus
d. Pituitary
e. Medulla oblongata
2333. In an experiment, a test animal had a part of its brain destroyed, which caused the animal to change from a homeothermic to a poikilothermic state. What part of the brain was destroyed in this case?
a. Pituitary
b. Pineal gland
c. Mesencephalon
d. Medulla oblongata
*e. Hypothalamus
2334. In an experiment, a test animal lost its orienting reflexes after certain structures of its central nervous system had been destroyed. At what level did the damage occur?
a. Diencephalon
b. Lateral vestibular nuclei
c. Red nuclei
*d. Corpora quadrigemina
e. Cerebellum
2335. In an experiment, a test animal lost its orienting reflexes after certain structures of its central nervous system had been destroyed. At what level did the damage occur?
a. Red nuclei
b. Cerebellum
c. Lateral vestibular nuclei
d. Diencephalon
*e. Corpora quadrigemina
2336. In an experiment, an excitable cell was exposed to tetraethylammonium that blocks potassium-selective ion channels. What effect will it have on the membrane potential of the cell?
*a. Resting potential will disappear
b. Resting potential will increase
c. Hyperpolarization will develop
d. Action potential will not occur
e. Resting potential will remain unchanged
2337. In an experiment, an excitable cell was exposed to tetraethylammonium that blocks potassium-selective ion channels. What effect will it have on the membrane potential of the cell?
a. Action potential will not occur
b. Resting potential will remain unchanged
c. Hyperpolarization will develop
d. Resting potential will increase
*e. Resting potential will disappear
2338. In an experiment, an excitable cell was exposed to tetraethylammonium that blocks potassium-selective ion channels. What effect will it have on the membrane potential of the cell?
a. Resting potential will remain unchanged
b. Action potential will not occur
c. Resting potential will increase
*d. Resting potential will disappear
e. Hyperpolarization will develop
2339. In an experiment, cerebral neurons of a test animal were electrostimulated, which resulted in hypophagia (refusal to eat food). Where in the brain were the electrodes placed?
*a. Hypothalamus
b. Red nucleus
c. Adenohypophysis
d. Neurohypophysis
e. Thalamus
2340. In an experiment, cerebral neurons of a test animal were electrostimulated, which resulted in hypophagia (refusal to eat food). Where in the brain were the electrodes placed?
a. Neurohypophysis
b. Thalamus
*c. Hypothalamus
d. Adenohypophysis
e. Red nucleus
2341. In an experiment, cerebral neurons of a test animal were electrostimulated, which resulted in hypophagia (refusal to eat food). Where in the brain were the electrodes placed?
a. Red nucleus
b. Adenohypophysis
c. Thalamus
*d. Hypothalamus
e. Neurohypophysis
2342. In an experiment, dehydration was induced in a test animal. What receptors signal a lack of water?
a. Carotid body chemoreceptors
*b. Atrial volume receptors
c. Gastric mechanoreceptors
d. Taste receptors
e. Hypothalamic osmoreceptors
2343. In an experiment, dehydration was induced in a test animal. What receptors signal a lack of water?
a. Hypothalamic osmoreceptors
b. Gastric mechanoreceptors
*c. Atrial volume receptors
d. Carotid body chemoreceptors
e. Taste receptors
2344. In an experiment, dehydration was induced in a test animal. What receptors signal a lack of water?
a. Taste receptors
b. Gastric mechanoreceptors
c. Carotid body chemoreceptors
d. Hypothalamic osmoreceptors
*e. Atrial volume receptors
2345. In an experiment, ribosomes were destroyed in polychromatophilic erythroblasts of human red bone marrow. In this case, the synthesis of a certain specific protein will be disturbed. Name this protein.
a. Collagen
b. Elastin
c. Fibrinogen
*d. Globin
e. Laminin
2346. In an experiment, ribosomes were destroyed in polychromatophilic erythroblasts of human red bone marrow. In this case, the synthesis of a certain specific protein will be disturbed. Name this protein.
a. Collagen
b. Laminin
c. Fibrinogen
*d. Globin
e. Elastin
2347. In an experiment, ribosomes were destroyed in polychromatophilic erythroblasts of human red bone marrow. In this case, the synthesis of a certain specific protein will be disturbed. Name this protein.
a. Laminin
*b. Globin
c. Fibrinogen
d. Elastin
e. Collagen
2348. In an experiment, the common bile duct of a test animal was diverted outwards. What digestive processes become disturbed as a result?
a. Hydrolysis and absorption of carbohydrates
b. Hydrolysis and absorption of proteins
c. Hydrolysis and absorption of fats, proteins, and carbohydrates
d. Water absorption
*e. Hydrolysis and absorption of fats
2349. In an experiment, the common bile duct of a test animal was diverted outwards. What digestive processes become disturbed as a result?
a. Hydrolysis and absorption of fats, proteins, and carbohydrates
*b. Hydrolysis and absorption of fats
c. Hydrolysis and absorption of carbohydrates
d. Water absorption
e. Hydrolysis and absorption of proteins
2350. In an experiment, the common bile duct of a test animal was diverted outwards. What digestive processes become disturbed as a result?
a. Water absorption
b. Hydrolysis and absorption of proteins
c. Hydrolysis and absorption of fats, proteins, and carbohydrates
d. Hydrolysis and absorption of carbohydrates
*e. Hydrolysis and absorption of fats
2351. In an experiment, the development of mesenchymal cells was completely inhibited. What type of muscle tissue will be maldeveloped as a result?
*a. Smooth muscle tissue
b. Skeletal muscle tissue
c. Muscle tissue of epidermal origin
d. Cardiac muscle tissue
e. Muscle tissue of neural origin
2352. In an experiment, the development of mesenchymal cells was completely inhibited. What type of muscle tissue will be maldeveloped as a result?
a. Muscle tissue of epidermal origin
b. Cardiac muscle tissue
*c. Smooth muscle tissue
d. Muscle tissue of neural origin
e. Skeletal muscle tissue
2353. In an experiment, the development of mesenchymal cells was completely inhibited. What type of muscle tissue will be maldeveloped as a result?
a. Muscle tissue of neural origin
b. Cardiac muscle tissue
c. Skeletal muscle tissue
d. Muscle tissue of epidermal origin
*e. Smooth muscle tissue
2354. In an experiment, the internal layer of the enamel organ epithelium was destroyed in the tooth germ of a lab animal. It will disrupt the development of the following dental tissue:
*a. Enamel
b. Dentin
c. Periodontium
d. Pulp
e. Cement
2355. In an experiment, the internal layer of the enamel organ epithelium was destroyed in the tooth germ of a lab animal. It will disrupt the development of the following dental tissue:
a. Periodontium
b. Pulp
c. Cement
*d. Enamel
e. Dentin
2356. In an experiment, the internal layer of the enamel organ epithelium was destroyed in the tooth germ of a lab animal. It will disrupt the development of the following dental tissue:
a. Pulp
b. Cement
*c. Enamel
d. Dentin
e. Periodontium
2357. In an experiment, the oxygen supply to an isolated mammalian nerve cell was completely stopped. How will the resting potential change in this case?
*a. Disappear
b. Significantly increase
c. Significantly decrease
d. Remain unchanged
e. Slightly increase
2358. In an experiment, the oxygen supply to an isolated mammalian nerve cell was completely stopped. How will the resting potential change in this case?
a. Significantly increase
b. Significantly decrease
c. Remain unchanged
d. Slightly increase
*e. Disappear
2359. In an experiment, the oxygen supply to an isolated mammalian nerve cell was completely stopped. How will the resting potential change in this case?
a. Significantly increase
b. Slightly increase
c. Remain unchanged
d. Significantly decrease
*e. Disappear
2360. In an experiment, the vagus nerve was severed in a test animal. As the result, the animal developed elevated blood glucose due to:
a. Increased secretion of glucagon
b. Decreased secretion of glucagon
c. Increased secretion of insulin
*d. Decreased secretion of insulin
e. Increased secretion of somatostatin
2361. In an experiment, the vagus nerve was severed in a test animal. As the result, the animal developed elevated blood glucose due to:
a. Increased secretion of insulin
b. Increased secretion of somatostatin
c. Increased secretion of glucagon
d. Decreased secretion of glucagon
*e. Decreased secretion of insulin
2362. In an experiment, the vagus nerve was severed in a test animal. As the result, the animal developed elevated blood glucose due to:
a. Increased secretion of somatostatin
b. Increased secretion of glucagon
*c. Decreased secretion of insulin
d. Decreased secretion of glucagon
e. Increased secretion of insulin
2363. In an experiment, thymus was removed from the newborn mice. After its removal, the blood of these mice exhibited low lymphocyte count, no production of antibodies, and no rejection of foreign tissues. In the work of which system of the body thymus plays an important role?
*a. Immune
b. Reproductive
c. Nervous
d. Circulatory
e. Endocrine
2364. In an experiment, thymus was removed from the newborn mice. After its removal, the blood of these mice exhibited low lymphocyte count, no production of antibodies, and no rejection of foreign tissues. In the work of which system of the body thymus plays an important role?
a. Nervous
b. Reproductive
c. Endocrine
d. Circulatory
*e. Immune
2365. In an experiment, thymus was removed from the newborn mice. After its removal, the blood of these mice exhibited low lymphocyte count, no production of antibodies, and no rejection of foreign tissues. In the work of which system of the body thymus plays an important role?
a. Reproductive
b. Nervous
*c. Immune
d. Endocrine
e. Circulatory
2366. In an experiment, urethane poisoning was induced in a test animal. What type of hypoxia occurred as a result?
a. Hemic hypoxia
*b. Tissue hypoxia
c. Respiratory hypoxia
d. Circulatory hypoxia
e. Hypoxic hypoxia
2367. In an experiment, urethane poisoning was induced in a test animal. What type of hypoxia occurred as a result?
a. Hypoxic hypoxia
b. Circulatory hypoxia
*c. Tissue hypoxia
d. Respiratory hypoxia
e. Hemic hypoxia
2368. In an experiment, urethane poisoning was induced in a test animal. What type of hypoxia occurred as a result?
a. Respiratory hypoxia
*b. Tissue hypoxia
c. Circulatory hypoxia
d. Hemic hypoxia
e. Hypoxic hypoxia
2369. In an experimental model, a morphological disturbance was induced in rats in the epithelial cells of the distal parts of the nephron. What functional processes in the kidneys become weakened in this case?
*a. Reabsorption of electrolytes and water
b. Reabsorption of proteins
c. Reabsorption of glucose
d. Reabsorption of sodium and glucose
e. Filtration
2370. In an experimental model, a morphological disturbance was induced in rats in the epithelial cells of the distal parts of the nephron. What functional processes in the kidneys become weakened in this case?
a. Reabsorption of glucose
b. Reabsorption of proteins
c. Filtration
d. Reabsorption of sodium and glucose
*e. Reabsorption of electrolytes and water
2371. In an experimental model, a morphological disturbance was induced in rats in the epithelial cells of the distal parts of the nephron. What functional processes in the kidneys become weakened in this case?
a. Reabsorption of sodium and glucose
b. Reabsorption of proteins
c. Filtration
d. Reabsorption of glucose
*e. Reabsorption of electrolytes and water
2372. In certain cells of an adult person, mitosis is not observed throughout the life and the quantitative content of DNA remains constant. Name these cells.
a. Endothelium
b. Hematopoietic
c. Muscle (smooth)
d. Epidermis
*e. Neurons
2373. In certain cells of an adult person, mitosis is not observed throughout the life and the quantitative content of DNA remains constant. Name these cells.
a. Epidermis
*b. Neurons
c. Endothelium
d. Hematopoietic
e. Muscle (smooth)
2374. In certain cells of an adult person, mitosis is not observed throughout the life and the quantitative content of DNA remains constant. Name these cells.
a. Epidermis
b. Hematopoietic
*c. Neurons
d. Endothelium
e. Muscle (smooth)
2375. In diabetes mellitus, the levels of ketone bodies in the blood increase, causing metabolic acidosis. From what substance are ketone bodies synthesized?
*a. Acetyl-CoA
b. Malonyl-CoA
c. Methylmalonyl-CoA
d. Propionyl-CoA
e. Succinyl-CoA
2376. In diabetes mellitus, the levels of ketone bodies in the blood increase, causing metabolic acidosis. From what substance are ketone bodies synthesized?
*a. Acetyl-CoA
b. Propionyl-CoA
c. Methylmalonyl-CoA
d. Malonyl-CoA
e. Succinyl-CoA
2377. In diabetes mellitus, the levels of ketone bodies in the blood increase, causing metabolic acidosis. From what substance are ketone bodies synthesized?
a. Succinyl-CoA
b. Malonyl-CoA
*c. Acetyl-CoA
d. Propionyl-CoA
e. Methylmalonyl-CoA
2378. In hot weather the bus passengers asked to open the roof hatches. What way of heat transfer is activated in this situation?
*a. Convection
b. Radiation
c. Sweat evaporation
d. Conduction and radiation
e. Conduction
2379. In hot weather the bus passengers asked to open the roof hatches. What way of heat transfer is activated in this situation?
a. Conduction and radiation
*b. Convection
c. Sweat evaporation
d. Radiation
e. Conduction
2380. In hot weather the bus passengers asked to open the roof hatches. What way of heat transfer is activated in this situation?
a. Sweat evaporation
b. Radiation
c. Conduction
*d. Convection
e. Conduction and radiation
2381. In human population some people throughout their life develop not two but three dentitions. It is the manifestation of the following law:
*a. Biogenetic law (recapitulation theory)
b. Homologous series of genetic variation
c. Independent assortment
d. Hardy-Weinberg principle
e. Embryonic induction
2382. In human population some people throughout their life develop not two but three dentitions. It is the manifestation of the following law:
a. Embryonic induction
b. Independent assortment
*c. Biogenetic law (recapitulation theory)
d. Hardy-Weinberg principle
e. Homologous series of genetic variation
2383. In human population some people throughout their life develop not two but three dentitions. It is the manifestation of the following law:
a. Embryonic induction
b. Independent assortment
c. Homologous series of genetic variation
d. Hardy-Weinberg principle
*e. Biogenetic law (recapitulation theory)
2384. In protein biosynthesis that occurs in a eukaryotic cell, one of the stages is the conversion of pro-mRNA into mRNA) As a result of this process, mRNA <<matures>>. Name this process.
a. Repair
b. Transduction
c. Transcription
*d. Processing
e. Replication
2385. In protein biosynthesis that occurs in a eukaryotic cell, one of the stages is the conversion of pro-mRNA into mRNA) As a result of this process, mRNA <<matures>>. Name this process.
a. Transcription
b. Replication
c. Transduction
d. Repair
*e. Processing
2386. In protein biosynthesis that occurs in a eukaryotic cell, one of the stages is the conversion of pro-mRNA into mRNA) As a result of this process, mRNA <<matures>>. Name this process.
a. Transcription
b. Transduction
c. Replication
*d. Processing
e. Repair
2387. In some Ukrainian regions, local cases of malaria were detected. What insects take part in such outbreaks?
*a. Mosquitoes of Anofeles genus
b. Flies of Ceratopogonidae family
c. Gadflies of Tabanidae family
d. Flies of Simulium genus
e. Mosquitoes of Phlebotomus genus
2388. In some Ukrainian regions, local cases of malaria were detected. What insects take part in such outbreaks?
a. Flies of Simulium genus
b. Mosquitoes of Phlebotomus genus
c. Gadflies of Tabanidae family
*d. Mosquitoes of Anofeles genus
e. Flies of Ceratopogonidae family
2389. In some Ukrainian regions, local cases of malaria were detected. What insects take part in such outbreaks?
a. Mosquitoes of Phlebotomus genus
b. Flies of Simulium genus
c. Flies of Ceratopogonidae family
d. Gadflies of Tabanidae family
*e. Mosquitoes of Anofeles genus
2390. In some diseases of the large intestine, the quantitative ratio of various mucosal epithelial cells may change. What type of cells is normally predominant in the epithelium of the crypts of the large intestine?
*a. Goblet cells
b. Poorly differentiated cells
c. Columnar villous epitheliocytes
d. Endocrinocytes
e. Cells with acidophilic granules
2391. In some diseases of the large intestine, the quantitative ratio of various mucosal epithelial cells may change. What type of cells is normally predominant in the epithelium of the crypts of the large intestine?
a. Columnar villous epitheliocytes
b. Endocrinocytes
*c. Goblet cells
d. Cells with acidophilic granules
e. Poorly differentiated cells
2392. In some diseases of the large intestine, the quantitative ratio of various mucosal epithelial cells may change. What type of cells is normally predominant in the epithelium of the crypts of the large intestine?
a. Columnar villous epitheliocytes
b. Endocrinocytes
c. Poorly differentiated cells
*d. Goblet cells
e. Cells with acidophilic granules
2393. In some hereditary diseases (e.g., Kearns-Sayre syndrome), mitochondrial destruction can be observed. What cellular processes can be disturbed in the result?
*a. ATP synthesis
b. Crossingover
c. Lipid synthesis
d. Nuclear division
e. Protein synthesis
2394. In some hereditary diseases (e.g., Kearns-Sayre syndrome), mitochondrial destruction can be observed. What cellular processes can be disturbed in the result?
a. Crossingover
b. Lipid synthesis
c. Nuclear division
*d. ATP synthesis
e. Protein synthesis
2395. In some hereditary diseases (e.g., Kearns-Sayre syndrome), mitochondrial destruction can be observed. What cellular processes can be disturbed in the result?
a. Protein synthesis
b. Crossingover
c. Nuclear division
d. Lipid synthesis
*e. ATP synthesis
2396. In the blood plasma of a healthy person there are several dozens of proteins. Illness leads to production of new proteins, in particular ''acute-phase proteins''. Name one such protein:
a. Fibrinogen
*b. C-reactive protein
c. Prothrombin
d. Immunoglobulin A
e. Immunoglobulin G
2397. In the blood plasma of a healthy person there are several dozens of proteins. Illness leads to production of new proteins, in particular ''acute-phase proteins''. Name one such protein:
a. Immunoglobulin G
b. Fibrinogen
*c. C-reactive protein
d. Immunoglobulin A
e. Prothrombin
2398. In the blood plasma of a healthy person there are several dozens of proteins. Illness leads to production of new proteins, in particular ''acute-phase proteins''. Name one such protein:
a. Prothrombin
b. Immunoglobulin G
*c. C-reactive protein
d. Immunoglobulin A
e. Fibrinogen
2399. In the body of a female Anopheles mosquito, the malaria Plasmodium reproduces via copulation (a type of sexual process). What type of host is this insect for malaria Plasmodium?
*a. Definitive
b. Reservoir
c. Additional
d. Optional
e. Intermediate
2400. In the body of a female Anopheles mosquito, the malaria Plasmodium reproduces via copulation (a type of sexual process). What type of host is this insect for malaria Plasmodium?
a. Reservoir
*b. Definitive
c. Intermediate
d. Optional
e. Additional
2401. In the body of a female Anopheles mosquito, the malaria Plasmodium reproduces via copulation (a type of sexual process). What type of host is this insect for malaria Plasmodium?
a. Reservoir
b. Optional
*c. Definitive
d. Additional
e. Intermediate
2402. In the bone tissue there are large multinucleated cells with processes that contain numerous lysosome. Name these cells:
a. Chondroblasts
b. Chondrocytes
c. Mesenchymal cells
d. Semi-stem osteogenic cells
*e. Osteoclasts
2403. In the bone tissue there are large multinucleated cells with processes that contain numerous lysosome. Name these cells:
a. Mesenchymal cells
b. Chondrocytes
c. Semi-stem osteogenic cells
d. Chondroblasts
*e. Osteoclasts
2404. In the bone tissue there are large multinucleated cells with processes that contain numerous lysosome. Name these cells:
a. Mesenchymal cells
b. Semi-stem osteogenic cells
c. Chondroblasts
*d. Osteoclasts
e. Chondrocytes
2405. In the course of a surgery, the fibers of the 12th pair of cranial nerves were damaged. This damage manifested as:
a. Disturbed contraction of the muscles of the soft palate
b. Disturbed contraction of the pharyngeal muscles
c. Disturbed contraction of the muscles that elevate the hyoid bone
d. Disturbed contraction of the laryngeal muscles
*e. Disturbed function of the lingual muscles
2406. In the course of a surgery, the fibers of the 12th pair of cranial nerves were damaged. This damage manifested as:
a. Disturbed contraction of the muscles that elevate the hyoid bone
b. Disturbed contraction of the laryngeal muscles
c. Disturbed contraction of the pharyngeal muscles
*d. Disturbed function of the lingual muscles
e. Disturbed contraction of the muscles of the soft palate
2407. In the course of a surgery, the fibers of the 12th pair of cranial nerves were damaged. This damage manifested as:
a. Disturbed contraction of the pharyngeal muscles
b. Disturbed contraction of the muscles of the soft palate
*c. Disturbed function of the lingual muscles
d. Disturbed contraction of the laryngeal muscles
e. Disturbed contraction of the muscles that elevate the hyoid bone
2408. In the course of experiment it is necessary to detect muscle excitation. For this purpose the following measurement should be made:
*a. Electromyogram
b. Contraction duration
c. Ion concentration
d. Contraction strength
e. Mechanomyogram
2409. In the course of experiment it is necessary to detect muscle excitation. For this purpose the following measurement should be made:
a. Ion concentration
b. Mechanomyogram
*c. Electromyogram
d. Contraction strength
e. Contraction duration
2410. In the course of experiment it is necessary to detect muscle excitation. For this purpose the following measurement should be made:
a. Mechanomyogram
b. Contraction strength
c. Ion concentration
*d. Electromyogram
e. Contraction duration
2411. In the course of experiment the vagus nerve of the test animal was severed, which resulted in the animal developing constant tachycardia. What effect of parasympathetic nervous system on cardiac performance is demonstrated by this experiment?
a. Paradoxical response
b. Mixed effect
*c. Inhibition
d. Stimulation
e. Stimulus summation
2412. In the course of experiment the vagus nerve of the test animal was severed, which resulted in the animal developing constant tachycardia. What effect of parasympathetic nervous system on cardiac performance is demonstrated by this experiment?
a. Paradoxical response
b. Stimulus summation
c. Mixed effect
d. Stimulation
*e. Inhibition
2413. In the course of experiment the vagus nerve of the test animal was severed, which resulted in the animal developing constant tachycardia. What effect of parasympathetic nervous system on cardiac performance is demonstrated by this experiment?
a. Stimulation
*b. Inhibition
c. Mixed effect
d. Paradoxical response
e. Stimulus summation
2414. In the epithelium of the airways, there are cells with a dome-shaped apical part with microvilli on its surface. These cells have a well-developed synthetic apparatus and contain secretory granules in their apical part. Name these cells.
a. Cambial cells
b. Goblet cells
c. Endocrine cells
*d. Clara cells
e. Cells without a border
2415. In the epithelium of the airways, there are cells with a dome-shaped apical part with microvilli on its surface. These cells have a well-developed synthetic apparatus and contain secretory granules in their apical part. Name these cells.
a. Endocrine cells
b. Cambial cells
c. Cells without a border
d. Goblet cells
*e. Clara cells
2416. In the epithelium of the airways, there are cells with a dome-shaped apical part with microvilli on its surface. These cells have a well-developed synthetic apparatus and contain secretory granules in their apical part. Name these cells.
a. Goblet cells
b. Endocrine cells
c. Cambial cells
d. Cells without a border
*e. Clara cells
2417. In the genetic consultancy a pregnant woman (20 weeks of pregnancy) was examined. US shows normally developed fetus, no abnormalities in the cardiovascular system, ductus arteriosus is functional. What fetal vessels are connected with ductus arteriosus?
*a. Pulmonary trunk and aorta
b. Pulmonary trunk and pulmonary veins
c. Pulmonary trunk and inferior vena cava
d. Aorta and superior vena cava
e. Aorta and inferior vena cava
2418. In the genetic consultancy a pregnant woman (20 weeks of pregnancy) was examined. US shows normally developed fetus, no abnormalities in the cardiovascular system, ductus arteriosus is functional. What fetal vessels are connected with ductus arteriosus?
a. Aorta and superior vena cava
b. Pulmonary trunk and pulmonary veins
c. Aorta and inferior vena cava
d. Pulmonary trunk and inferior vena cava
*e. Pulmonary trunk and aorta
2419. In the genetic consultancy a pregnant woman (20 weeks of pregnancy) was examined. US shows normally developed fetus, no abnormalities in the cardiovascular system, ductus arteriosus is functional. What fetal vessels are connected with ductus arteriosus?
a. Pulmonary trunk and inferior vena cava
*b. Pulmonary trunk and aorta
c. Aorta and inferior vena cava
d. Aorta and superior vena cava
e. Pulmonary trunk and pulmonary veins
2420. In the microslide of a human embryo obtained from a spontaneous miscarriage, an embryonic shield is visible and has two cellular layers: endoderm and ectoderm. This embryo was at the following developmental stage:
*a. Gastrulation
b. Histogenesis
c. Neurulation
d. Organogenesis
e. Progenesis
2421. In the microslide of a human embryo obtained from a spontaneous miscarriage, an embryonic shield is visible and has two cellular layers: endoderm and ectoderm. This embryo was at the following developmental stage:
*a. Gastrulation
b. Histogenesis
c. Organogenesis
d. Progenesis
e. Neurulation
2422. In the microslide of a human embryo obtained from a spontaneous miscarriage, an embryonic shield is visible and has two cellular layers: endoderm and ectoderm. This embryo was at the following developmental stage:
a. Histogenesis
*b. Gastrulation
c. Organogenesis
d. Progenesis
e. Neurulation
2423. In the patient's blood there is a C-reactive protein that chemically can be classified as a glycoprotein. It indicates the following pathology:
*a. Rheumatism
b. Anemia
c. Porphyria
d. Leucopenia
e. Thrombocytopenia
2424. In the patient's blood there is a C-reactive protein that chemically can be classified as a glycoprotein. It indicates the following pathology:
*a. Rheumatism
b. Porphyria
c. Leucopenia
d. Anemia
e. Thrombocytopenia
2425. In the patient's blood there is a C-reactive protein that chemically can be classified as a glycoprotein. It indicates the following pathology:
*a. Rheumatism
b. Thrombocytopenia
c. Porphyria
d. Anemia
e. Leucopenia
2426. In the periodontal tissues, electron microscopy detects fibers, one end of which is embedded into the cementum of the dental root, while the other is embedded into the periosteum of the alveolar process. Name these fibers.
*a. Sharpey fibers
b. Ebner fibers
c. Purkinje fibers
d. Argyrophilic fibers
e. Korff fibers
2427. In the periodontal tissues, electron microscopy detects fibers, one end of which is embedded into the cementum of the dental root, while the other is embedded into the periosteum of the alveolar process. Name these fibers.
a. Purkinje fibers
b. Ebner fibers
*c. Sharpey fibers
d. Argyrophilic fibers
e. Korff fibers
2428. In the periodontal tissues, electron microscopy detects fibers, one end of which is embedded into the cementum of the dental root, while the other is embedded into the periosteum of the alveolar process. Name these fibers.
a. Purkinje fibers
b. Ebner fibers
c. Korff fibers
d. Argyrophilic fibers
*e. Sharpey fibers
2429. In the process of tooth extraction, the connection between the tooth cement and tooth socket is being destroyed. Name this connecting structure:
a. Dentin
b. Gums
c. Enamel
d. Cement
*e. Periodontium
2430. In the process of tooth extraction, the connection between the tooth cement and tooth socket is being destroyed. Name this connecting structure:
a. Enamel
b. Dentin
c. Gums
d. Cement
*e. Periodontium
2431. In the process of tooth extraction, the connection between the tooth cement and tooth socket is being destroyed. Name this connecting structure:
a. Gums
b. Dentin
*c. Periodontium
d. Cement
e. Enamel
2432. In the surgical department, dressing material was being sterilized in an autoclave. Because of nurse's oversight, the sterilization regimen was disturbed and temperature in the autoclave chamber reached only 100^oC instead of required 120^oC) What microorganisms could remain viable under such conditions?
*a. Bacilli and clostridia
b. Staphylococci and streptococci
c. Salmonellae and klebsiellae
d. Corynebacteria and mycobacteria
e. Mold and yeast-like fungi
2433. In the surgical department, dressing material was being sterilized in an autoclave. Because of nurse's oversight, the sterilization regimen was disturbed and temperature in the autoclave chamber reached only 100^oC instead of required 120^oC) What microorganisms could remain viable under such conditions?
a. Mold and yeast-like fungi
b. Corynebacteria and mycobacteria
*c. Bacilli and clostridia
d. Salmonellae and klebsiellae
e. Staphylococci and streptococci
2434. In the surgical department, dressing material was being sterilized in an autoclave. Because of nurse's oversight, the sterilization regimen was disturbed and temperature in the autoclave chamber reached only 100^oC instead of required 120^oC) What microorganisms could remain viable under such conditions?
a. Staphylococci and streptococci
b. Mold and yeast-like fungi
c. Corynebacteria and mycobacteria
d. Salmonellae and klebsiellae
*e. Bacilli and clostridia
2435. In the wall of a blood vessel there is a large number of elastic fibers in all the layers. The middle layer contains elastic fenestrated membranes. Such characteristics of the vessel wall structure are caused by the following factors:
a. Low blood pressure
*b. High blood pressure
c. High blood flow velocity
d. Osmotic pressure
e. Low blood flow velocity
2436. In the wall of a blood vessel there is a large number of elastic fibers in all the layers. The middle layer contains elastic fenestrated membranes. Such characteristics of the vessel wall structure are caused by the following factors:
a. Low blood pressure
b. Low blood flow velocity
*c. High blood pressure
d. High blood flow velocity
e. Osmotic pressure
2437. In the wall of a blood vessel there is a large number of elastic fibers in all the layers. The middle layer contains elastic fenestrated membranes. Such characteristics of the vessel wall structure are caused by the following factors:
a. Osmotic pressure
*b. High blood pressure
c. Low blood flow velocity
d. High blood flow velocity
e. Low blood pressure
2438. In tubootitis, tympanic membrane retraction occurs. The handle of one of the auditory ossicles, connected to the tympanic membrane, becomes more horizontal. In such cases, the doctor needs to determine the position of the following bone during the examination:
a. Incus
b. Processus mastoideus
*c. Malleus
d. Squama os temporale
e. Stapes
2439. In tubootitis, tympanic membrane retraction occurs. The handle of one of the auditory ossicles, connected to the tympanic membrane, becomes more horizontal. In such cases, the doctor needs to determine the position of the following bone during the examination:
a. Processus mastoideus
b. Stapes
c. Incus
*d. Malleus
e. Squama os temporale
2440. In what organ biotransformation (metabolic transformation) of most medicinal agents occurs upon their introduction into an organism?
a. Kidneys
*b. Liver
c. Lungs
d. Intestine
e. Skin
2441. In what organ biotransformation (metabolic transformation) of most medicinal agents occurs upon their introduction into an organism?
a. Lungs
*b. Liver
c. Skin
d. Kidneys
e. Intestine
2442. In what organ biotransformation (metabolic transformation) of most medicinal agents occurs upon their introduction into an organism?
a. Lungs
b. Kidneys
c. Intestine
d. Skin
*e. Liver
2443. Increased aortic blood pressure created an overload of the cardiac muscle. In what cardiac structure does the muscle wall respond to the irritation in this case?
a. Left atrium
b. Right atrium
*c. Left ventricle
d. Venous sinus
e. Right ventricle
2444. Increased aortic blood pressure created an overload of the cardiac muscle. In what cardiac structure does the muscle wall respond to the irritation in this case?
a. Right atrium
b. Left atrium
c. Right ventricle
*d. Left ventricle
e. Venous sinus
2445. Increased aortic blood pressure created an overload of the cardiac muscle. In what cardiac structure does the muscle wall respond to the irritation in this case?
a. Right atrium
b. Left atrium
c. Venous sinus
*d. Left ventricle
e. Right ventricle
2446. Increased levels of high-density lipoproteins lead to decreased risk of atherosclerosis. What is the mechanism of anti-atherosclerotic effect of high-density lipoproteins?
*a. They extract cholesterol from tissues
b. They take part in cholesterol breakdown
c. They facilitate cholesterol absorption in the intestine
d. They activate cholesterol transformation into bile acids
e. They supply tissues with cholesterol
2447. Increased levels of high-density lipoproteins lead to decreased risk of atherosclerosis. What is the mechanism of anti-atherosclerotic effect of high-density lipoproteins?
a. They supply tissues with cholesterol
b. They activate cholesterol transformation into bile acids
c. They take part in cholesterol breakdown
d. They facilitate cholesterol absorption in the intestine
*e. They extract cholesterol from tissues
2448. Increased levels of high-density lipoproteins lead to decreased risk of atherosclerosis. What is the mechanism of anti-atherosclerotic effect of high-density lipoproteins?
a. They supply tissues with cholesterol
b. They facilitate cholesterol absorption in the intestine
c. They take part in cholesterol breakdown
d. They activate cholesterol transformation into bile acids
*e. They extract cholesterol from tissues
2449. Increased stumulation rate of isolated heart of a rabbit leads to incomplete relaxation of the heart ventricles due to:
*a. Calcium accumulation in cardiomyocytes
b. Increased potassium content in the interstitial tissue
c. Increased potassium content in cardiomyocytes
d. Inhibition of K-Na pump
e. Increased sodium content in cardiomyocytes
2450. Increased stumulation rate of isolated heart of a rabbit leads to incomplete relaxation of the heart ventricles due to:
a. Increased potassium content in cardiomyocytes
*b. Calcium accumulation in cardiomyocytes
c. Increased sodium content in cardiomyocytes
d. Increased potassium content in the interstitial tissue
e. Inhibition of K-Na pump
2451. Increased stumulation rate of isolated heart of a rabbit leads to incomplete relaxation of the heart ventricles due to:
a. Increased sodium content in cardiomyocytes
b. Increased potassium content in cardiomyocytes
c. Increased potassium content in the interstitial tissue
*d. Calcium accumulation in cardiomyocytes
e. Inhibition of K-Na pump
2452. Indirect calorimetry shows that the basal metabolic rate of a person is 40% lower than the norm. What endocrine gland does not function properly in this person, causing this condition?
*a. Thyroid gland
b. Pancreas
c. Adrenal glands
d. Thymus
e. Pineal gland
2453. Indirect calorimetry shows that the basal metabolic rate of a person is 40% lower than the norm. What endocrine gland does not function properly in this person, causing this condition?
a. Adrenal glands
b. Pineal gland
c. Thymus
d. Pancreas
*e. Thyroid gland
2454. Indirect calorimetry shows that the basal metabolic rate of a person is 40% lower than the norm. What endocrine gland does not function properly in this person, causing this condition?
a. Thymus
b. Pancreas
c. Pineal gland
d. Adrenal glands
*e. Thyroid gland
2455. Influenza serology allows detecting the increase of antibody titer against the causative agent in the patient's blood serum. What antibody titer increase must be observed with paired serum samples, for the result to be considered valid?
a. By one titer
b. Triple increase
c. By a half-titer
*d. Fourfold increase or more
e. Double increase
2456. Influenza serology allows detecting the increase of antibody titer against the causative agent in the patient's blood serum. What antibody titer increase must be observed with paired serum samples, for the result to be considered valid?
a. Double increase
b. By a half-titer
c. By one titer
*d. Fourfold increase or more
e. Triple increase
2457. Influenza serology allows detecting the increase of antibody titer against the causative agent in the patient's blood serum. What antibody titer increase must be observed with paired serum samples, for the result to be considered valid?
a. Triple increase
b. By a half-titer
c. Double increase
*d. Fourfold increase or more
e. By one titer
2458. Intensive physical work leads to accumulation of lactic acid in muscles. What enzyme enables formation of lactic acid from pyruvate in the process of anaerobic glycolysis?
a. Aldolase
b. Pyruvate carboxylase
c. Pyruvate dehydrogenase
d. Phosphofructokinase
*e. Lactate dehydrogenase
2459. Intensive physical work leads to accumulation of lactic acid in muscles. What enzyme enables formation of lactic acid from pyruvate in the process of anaerobic glycolysis?
a. Pyruvate carboxylase
b. Pyruvate dehydrogenase
c. Aldolase
d. Phosphofructokinase
*e. Lactate dehydrogenase
2460. Intensive physical work leads to accumulation of lactic acid in muscles. What enzyme enables formation of lactic acid from pyruvate in the process of anaerobic glycolysis?
a. Pyruvate dehydrogenase
b. Phosphofructokinase
*c. Lactate dehydrogenase
d. Aldolase
e. Pyruvate carboxylase
2461. Iron is released in the process of hemoglobin catabolism. Then, as a part of a special transport protein, it arrives into the bone marrow and is used again for hemoglobin synthesis. Name this transport protein:
a. Ceruloplasmin
*b. Transferrin
c. Haptoglobin
d. Transcobalamin
e. Albumin
2462. Iron is released in the process of hemoglobin catabolism. Then, as a part of a special transport protein, it arrives into the bone marrow and is used again for hemoglobin synthesis. Name this transport protein:
a. Haptoglobin
b. Albumin
c. Transcobalamin
*d. Transferrin
e. Ceruloplasmin
2463. Iron is released in the process of hemoglobin catabolism. Then, as a part of a special transport protein, it arrives into the bone marrow and is used again for hemoglobin synthesis. Name this transport protein:
a. Transcobalamin
b. Ceruloplasmin
*c. Transferrin
d. Albumin
e. Haptoglobin
2464. It is dangerous to eat plants and mushrooms harvested along the motorways due to high risk of lead poisoning. What is the main source of lead contamination in the environment?
*a. Exhaust gases
b. Sewage
c. Chemical fertilizers
d. Acid rains
e. Herbicides
2465. It is dangerous to eat plants and mushrooms harvested along the motorways due to high risk of lead poisoning. What is the main source of lead contamination in the environment?
a. Herbicides
b. Sewage
c. Chemical fertilizers
d. Acid rains
*e. Exhaust gases
2466. It is dangerous to eat plants and mushrooms harvested along the motorways due to high risk of lead poisoning. What is the main source of lead contamination in the environment?
a. Sewage
b. Acid rains
c. Herbicides
*d. Exhaust gases
e. Chemical fertilizers
2467. It is known that calcium ions, along with other factors, enable contraction of the muscle tissue. In the process of muscle contraction, calcium interacts with the following structures:
*a. Troponin protein of thin fibrils
b. Myosin protein of thick fibrils
c. Calsequestrin protein
d. Actin protein of thin fibrils
e. Actomyosin complex of sarcolemma
2468. It is known that calcium ions, along with other factors, enable contraction of the muscle tissue. In the process of muscle contraction, calcium interacts with the following structures:
a. Actin protein of thin fibrils
*b. Troponin protein of thin fibrils
c. Myosin protein of thick fibrils
d. Calsequestrin protein
e. Actomyosin complex of sarcolemma
2469. It is known that calcium ions, along with other factors, enable contraction of the muscle tissue. In the process of muscle contraction, calcium interacts with the following structures:
a. Calsequestrin protein
b. Actin protein of thin fibrils
*c. Troponin protein of thin fibrils
d. Myosin protein of thick fibrils
e. Actomyosin complex of sarcolemma
2470. It is known that in metabolism of catecholamine mediators the special role belongs to monoamine oxidase (MAO). How does this enzyme activate these mediators (noradrenaline, adrenaline, dopamine)?
a. Amino group attachment
b. Carboxylation
*c. Oxidative deaminization
d. Hydrolysis
e. Methyl group removal
2471. It is known that in metabolism of catecholamine mediators the special role belongs to monoamine oxidase (MAO). How does this enzyme activate these mediators (noradrenaline, adrenaline, dopamine)?
a. Carboxylation
*b. Oxidative deaminization
c. Hydrolysis
d. Methyl group removal
e. Amino group attachment
2472. It is known that in metabolism of catecholamine mediators the special role belongs to monoamine oxidase (MAO). How does this enzyme activate these mediators (noradrenaline, adrenaline, dopamine)?
a. Methyl group removal
*b. Oxidative deaminization
c. Amino group attachment
d. Hydrolysis
e. Carboxylation
2473. It is necessary to decrease pumping ability of the patient's heart. What membrane cytoreceptors must be blocked to achieve this effect?
a. Muscarinic acetylcholine receptors
*b. beta-adrenergic receptors
c. Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
d. alpha- and beta-adrenergic receptors
e. alpha-adrenergic receptors
2474. It is necessary to decrease pumping ability of the patient's heart. What membrane cytoreceptors must be blocked to achieve this effect?
a. Muscarinic acetylcholine receptors
b. Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
c. alpha-adrenergic receptors
*d. beta-adrenergic receptors
e. alpha- and beta-adrenergic receptors
2475. It is necessary to decrease pumping ability of the patient's heart. What membrane cytoreceptors must be blocked to achieve this effect?
a. alpha- and beta-adrenergic receptors
b. Muscarinic acetylcholine receptors
c. Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
*d. beta-adrenergic receptors
e. alpha-adrenergic receptors
2476. Ketone bodies were detected in the urine of a patient. Ketone bodies appear in the urine during the following disease:
*a. Diabetes mellitus
b. Renal infarction
c. Acute glomerulonephritis
d. Renal tuberculosis
e. Urolithiasis
2477. Ketone bodies were detected in the urine of a patient. Ketone bodies appear in the urine during the following disease:
a. Renal infarction
b. Urolithiasis
c. Renal tuberculosis
d. Acute glomerulonephritis
*e. Diabetes mellitus
2478. Ketone bodies were detected in the urine of a patient. Ketone bodies appear in the urine during the following disease:
a. Renal tuberculosis
*b. Diabetes mellitus
c. Acute glomerulonephritis
d. Urolithiasis
e. Renal infarction
2479. Kidney diseases lead to increased levels of residual nitrogen in the blood. What fraction contributes to the elevated residual nitrogen levels in the patients with renal pathology?
*a. Urea
b. Uric acid
c. Prokinase
d. Ammonium
e. Ammonia
2480. Kidney diseases lead to increased levels of residual nitrogen in the blood. What fraction contributes to the elevated residual nitrogen levels in the patients with renal pathology?
a. Ammonium
b. Prokinase
c. Ammonia
d. Uric acid
*e. Urea
2481. Kidney diseases lead to increased levels of residual nitrogen in the blood. What fraction contributes to the elevated residual nitrogen levels in the patients with renal pathology?
a. Prokinase
b. Ammonia
*c. Urea
d. Ammonium
e. Uric acid
2482. Lab rats were used to study the effect of a certain vitamin on the body. Deficiency of this vitamin has resulted in a disturbed reproductive function and skeletal muscle dystrophy. What vitamin is it?
*a. E
b. B_2
c. D
d. A
e. K
2483. Lab rats were used to study the effect of a certain vitamin on the body. Deficiency of this vitamin has resulted in a disturbed reproductive function and skeletal muscle dystrophy. What vitamin is it?
a. A
b. B_2
c. D
*d. E
e. K
2484. Lab rats were used to study the effect of a certain vitamin on the body. Deficiency of this vitamin has resulted in a disturbed reproductive function and skeletal muscle dystrophy. What vitamin is it?
a. B_2
b. K
c. A
d. D
*e. E
2485. Laboratory analysis confirmed the patient's diagnosis of gout. What analysis was conducted to make this diagnosis?
*a. Measuring uric acid levels in the blood and urine
b. Measuring urine creatinine levels
c. Measuring residual nitrogen in the blood
d. Measuring urine ammonia levels
e. Measuring urea levels in the blood and urine
2486. Laboratory analysis confirmed the patient's diagnosis of gout. What analysis was conducted to make this diagnosis?
a. Measuring urea levels in the blood and urine
b. Measuring residual nitrogen in the blood
c. Measuring urine ammonia levels
*d. Measuring uric acid levels in the blood and urine
e. Measuring urine creatinine levels
2487. Laboratory analysis confirmed the patient's diagnosis of gout. What analysis was conducted to make this diagnosis?
a. Measuring urine ammonia levels
b. Measuring residual nitrogen in the blood
*c. Measuring uric acid levels in the blood and urine
d. Measuring urea levels in the blood and urine
e. Measuring urine creatinine levels
2488. Laboratory analysis revealed UDP-glucuronyl transferase deficiency in the patient. What blood values can confirm this enzymopathy?
*a. Hyperbilirubinemia
b. Uremia
c. Indicanuria
d. Ketoacidosis
e. Phenylketonuria
2489. Laboratory analysis revealed UDP-glucuronyl transferase deficiency in the patient. What blood values can confirm this enzymopathy?
a. Indicanuria
*b. Hyperbilirubinemia
c. Uremia
d. Phenylketonuria
e. Ketoacidosis
2490. Laboratory analysis revealed UDP-glucuronyl transferase deficiency in the patient. What blood values can confirm this enzymopathy?
a. Phenylketonuria
b. Ketoacidosis
*c. Hyperbilirubinemia
d. Uremia
e. Indicanuria
2491. Lately, the laboratory diagnostics of hepatitis B includes detecting the presence of viral DNA in the patient's blood. What reaction is used to determine it?
a. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
b. Hemagglutination inhibition reaction
*c. Polymerase chain reaction
d. Indirect hemagglutination reaction
e. Complement fixation reaction
2492. Lately, the laboratory diagnostics of hepatitis B includes detecting the presence of viral DNA in the patient's blood. What reaction is used to determine it?
a. Hemagglutination inhibition reaction
*b. Polymerase chain reaction
c. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
d. Indirect hemagglutination reaction
e. Complement fixation reaction
2493. Lately, the laboratory diagnostics of hepatitis B includes detecting the presence of viral DNA in the patient's blood. What reaction is used to determine it?
a. Indirect hemagglutination reaction
b. Hemagglutination inhibition reaction
*c. Polymerase chain reaction
d. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
e. Complement fixation reaction
2494. Light microscopy was used to study the morphology of human Y chromosome. Centromere is located close to one of the ends of the chromosome. Name the type of the chromosome:
a. Submetacentric
*b. Acrocentric
c. Polytene
d. Telocentric
e. Metacentric
2495. Light microscopy was used to study the morphology of human Y chromosome. Centromere is located close to one of the ends of the chromosome. Name the type of the chromosome:
a. Telocentric
b. Metacentric
c. Submetacentric
*d. Acrocentric
e. Polytene
2496. Light microscopy was used to study the morphology of human Y chromosome. Centromere is located close to one of the ends of the chromosome. Name the type of the chromosome:
a. Telocentric
b. Submetacentric
*c. Acrocentric
d. Metacentric
e. Polytene
2497. Local anesthetic lidocaine is widely used in dental practice. Lidocaine has an analgesic effect because it:
a. Activates voltage-gated potassium channels
b. Blocks voltage-gated potassium channels
c. Blocks ligand-gated sodium channels
d. Blocks voltage-gated calcium channels
*e. Blocks voltage-gated sodium channels
2498. Local anesthetic lidocaine is widely used in dental practice. Lidocaine has an analgesic effect because it:
a. Blocks ligand-gated sodium channels
b. Blocks voltage-gated calcium channels
*c. Blocks voltage-gated sodium channels
d. Blocks voltage-gated potassium channels
e. Activates voltage-gated potassium channels
2499. Local anesthetic lidocaine is widely used in dental practice. Lidocaine has an analgesic effect because it:
a. Blocks voltage-gated potassium channels
*b. Blocks voltage-gated sodium channels
c. Blocks voltage-gated calcium channels
d. Activates voltage-gated potassium channels
e. Blocks ligand-gated sodium channels
2500. Local anesthetics are used in dental practice. They block the following ion channels:
a. Chloride channels
b. Rapid calcium channels
c. Slow calcium channel
*d. Sodium channels
e. Potassium channels
2501. Local anesthetics are used in dental practice. They block the following ion channels:
a. Chloride channels
b. Slow calcium channel
c. Rapid calcium channels
d. Potassium channels
*e. Sodium channels
2502. Local anesthetics are used in dental practice. They block the following ion channels:
a. Slow calcium channel
*b. Sodium channels
c. Rapid calcium channels
d. Chloride channels
e. Potassium channels
2503. Longitudinal tooth section shoes a tissue that makes up the tooth basis and consists of collagen fibers, mineralized matrix, and tubules that hold dentinal fibers. This tissue develops from:
*a. Peripheral part of dental papilla
b. Intermediate cells of enamel organ
c. External cells of enamel organ
d. Dental saccule
e. Internal cells of enamel organ
2504. Longitudinal tooth section shoes a tissue that makes up the tooth basis and consists of collagen fibers, mineralized matrix, and tubules that hold dentinal fibers. This tissue develops from:
a. External cells of enamel organ
*b. Peripheral part of dental papilla
c. Intermediate cells of enamel organ
d. Dental saccule
e. Internal cells of enamel organ
2505. Longitudinal tooth section shoes a tissue that makes up the tooth basis and consists of collagen fibers, mineralized matrix, and tubules that hold dentinal fibers. This tissue develops from:
a. External cells of enamel organ
b. Intermediate cells of enamel organ
c. Dental saccule
*d. Peripheral part of dental papilla
e. Internal cells of enamel organ
2506. Lower limbs of a patient with varicose veins were examined. The patient's legs are cyanotic and pastose, skin temperature is low, single petechiae are observed. What disturbance of hemodynamics is it?
*a. Venous hyperemia
b. Obstruction ischemia
c. Thromboembolism
d. Compression ischemia
e. Arterial hyperemia
2507. Lower limbs of a patient with varicose veins were examined. The patient's legs are cyanotic and pastose, skin temperature is low, single petechiae are observed. What disturbance of hemodynamics is it?
a. Obstruction ischemia
*b. Venous hyperemia
c. Arterial hyperemia
d. Compression ischemia
e. Thromboembolism
2508. Lower limbs of a patient with varicose veins were examined. The patient's legs are cyanotic and pastose, skin temperature is low, single petechiae are observed. What disturbance of hemodynamics is it?
a. Thromboembolism
*b. Venous hyperemia
c. Arterial hyperemia
d. Compression ischemia
e. Obstruction ischemia
2509. Lysozyme is a hydrolyzing enzyme that provides protective function of saliva. Its antibacterial properties are based on its ability to break the structural integrity of a bacterial cell wall by inducing hydrolysis of the following:
a. Glycosidic bonds of nitrogen bases and pentoses
b. Cell wall antigens and endotoxins
c. Peptide bonds of proteins
*d. Glycosidic bonds of mucopolysaccharides
e. Ester bonds of lipids
2510. Lysozyme is a hydrolyzing enzyme that provides protective function of saliva. Its antibacterial properties are based on its ability to break the structural integrity of a bacterial cell wall by inducing hydrolysis of the following:
a. Peptide bonds of proteins
b. Ester bonds of lipids
c. Glycosidic bonds of nitrogen bases and pentoses
*d. Glycosidic bonds of mucopolysaccharides
e. Cell wall antigens and endotoxins
2511. Lysozyme is a hydrolyzing enzyme that provides protective function of saliva. Its antibacterial properties are based on its ability to break the structural integrity of a bacterial cell wall by inducing hydrolysis of the following:
a. Peptide bonds of proteins
b. Glycosidic bonds of nitrogen bases and pentoses
*c. Glycosidic bonds of mucopolysaccharides
d. Ester bonds of lipids
e. Cell wall antigens and endotoxins
2512. Macroscopic examination of lung tissue revealed areas of high airiness with small bubbles. Histological examination revealed thinning and rupture of alveolar septa accompanied by formation of large diversiform cavities. What disease was revealed in the lung?
*a. Pulmonary emphysema
b. Chronic bronchitis
c. Fibrosing alveolitis
d. Cavernous tuberculosis
e. Multiple bronchiectasis
2513. Macroscopic examination of lung tissue revealed areas of high airiness with small bubbles. Histological examination revealed thinning and rupture of alveolar septa accompanied by formation of large diversiform cavities. What disease was revealed in the lung?
a. Fibrosing alveolitis
b. Cavernous tuberculosis
*c. Pulmonary emphysema
d. Multiple bronchiectasis
e. Chronic bronchitis
2514. Macroscopic examination of lung tissue revealed areas of high airiness with small bubbles. Histological examination revealed thinning and rupture of alveolar septa accompanied by formation of large diversiform cavities. What disease was revealed in the lung?
a. Multiple bronchiectasis
b. Chronic bronchitis
c. Cavernous tuberculosis
d. Fibrosing alveolitis
*e. Pulmonary emphysema
2515. Mass screening of newborns for phenylketonuria is being carried out in Ukraine. What method of medical genetics is used for this purpose?
*a. Biochemistry
b. Genealogy
c. Population statistics
d. Twin method
e. Cytogenetics
2516. Mass screening of newborns for phenylketonuria is being carried out in Ukraine. What method of medical genetics is used for this purpose?
a. Genealogy
b. Population statistics
*c. Biochemistry
d. Cytogenetics
e. Twin method
2517. Mass screening of newborns for phenylketonuria is being carried out in Ukraine. What method of medical genetics is used for this purpose?
a. Twin method
b. Cytogenetics
c. Genealogy
d. Population statistics
*e. Biochemistry
2518. Megalocytes can appear in the peripheral blood of a person. When is the presence of these cells in the blood considered to be normal?
*a. During the embryonic stage
b. At the age of 1 to 3 years
c. During pregnancy
d. At the age of under 1 year
e. At middle age
2519. Megalocytes can appear in the peripheral blood of a person. When is the presence of these cells in the blood considered to be normal?
a. At the age of 1 to 3 years
b. During pregnancy
*c. During the embryonic stage
d. At middle age
e. At the age of under 1 year
2520. Megalocytes can appear in the peripheral blood of a person. When is the presence of these cells in the blood considered to be normal?
a. At the age of under 1 year
b. At middle age
c. During pregnancy
d. At the age of 1 to 3 years
*e. During the embryonic stage
2521. Membrane-acting protein/peptide hormones regulate metabolism in the cells, using intracellular mediators (messengers) for this purpose. ACTH causes intracellular effects by forming:
a. Calcium/calmodulin
b. -
c. Cyclic guanosine monophosphate
*d. Cyclic adenosine monophosphate
e. Inositol trisphosphate
2522. Membrane-acting protein/peptide hormones regulate metabolism in the cells, using intracellular mediators (messengers) for this purpose. ACTH causes intracellular effects by forming:
a. Calcium/calmodulin
b. Inositol trisphosphate
c. -
d. Cyclic guanosine monophosphate
*e. Cyclic adenosine monophosphate
2523. Membrane-acting protein/peptide hormones regulate metabolism in the cells, using intracellular mediators (messengers) for this purpose. ACTH causes intracellular effects by forming:
a. Inositol trisphosphate
b. -
c. Cyclic guanosine monophosphate
*d. Cyclic adenosine monophosphate
e. Calcium/calmodulin
2524. Microphotogram made with electron microscope shows alveolar cells that compose blood-air barrier. Name this cells:
*a. Alveolar respiratory epithelial cells
b. Alveolar macrophages
c. Alveolar secretory epithelial cells
d. Villous epithelial cells
e. Clara cells (club cells)
2525. Microphotogram made with electron microscope shows alveolar cells that compose blood-air barrier. Name this cells:
*a. Alveolar respiratory epithelial cells
b. Villous epithelial cells
c. Clara cells (club cells)
d. Alveolar macrophages
e. Alveolar secretory epithelial cells
2526. Microphotogram made with electron microscope shows alveolar cells that compose blood-air barrier. Name this cells:
a. Villous epithelial cells
b. Clara cells (club cells)
c. Alveolar secretory epithelial cells
*d. Alveolar respiratory epithelial cells
e. Alveolar macrophages
2527. Microscopy of a plaque-like structure extracted from the lateral surface of the tongue of a man with dentures revealed significant thickening of the epithelial layer along with processes of parakeratosis, hyperkeratosis, and acanthosis; in the connective tissue there are small round cell infiltrations. Make the diagnosis of the given pathological state:
*a. Leukoplakia
b. Atrophic (Hunter's) glossitis
c. Chronic glossitis
d. Chronic stomatitis
e. Ichthyosis
2528. Microscopy of a plaque-like structure extracted from the lateral surface of the tongue of a man with dentures revealed significant thickening of the epithelial layer along with processes of parakeratosis, hyperkeratosis, and acanthosis; in the connective tissue there are small round cell infiltrations. Make the diagnosis of the given pathological state:
a. Chronic glossitis
b. Ichthyosis
c. Chronic stomatitis
d. Atrophic (Hunter's) glossitis
*e. Leukoplakia
2529. Microscopy of a plaque-like structure extracted from the lateral surface of the tongue of a man with dentures revealed significant thickening of the epithelial layer along with processes of parakeratosis, hyperkeratosis, and acanthosis; in the connective tissue there are small round cell infiltrations. Make the diagnosis of the given pathological state:
a. Chronic stomatitis
*b. Leukoplakia
c. Atrophic (Hunter's) glossitis
d. Ichthyosis
e. Chronic glossitis
2530. Microscopy of a sputum sample obtained from a patient who has been suffering from pneumonia for a week detected helminth larvae. Eosinophilia is observed in the patient's blood. What diagnosis can be suspected in this case?
*a. Ascariasis
b. Echinococcosis
c. Taeniasis
d. Paragonimiasis
e. Fasciolasis
2531. Microscopy of a sputum sample obtained from a patient who has been suffering from pneumonia for a week detected helminth larvae. Eosinophilia is observed in the patient's blood. What diagnosis can be suspected in this case?
a. Echinococcosis
b. Taeniasis
*c. Ascariasis
d. Paragonimiasis
e. Fasciolasis
2532. Microscopy of a sputum sample obtained from a patient who has been suffering from pneumonia for a week detected helminth larvae. Eosinophilia is observed in the patient's blood. What diagnosis can be suspected in this case?
a. Echinococcosis
b. Taeniasis
c. Fasciolasis
*d. Ascariasis
e. Paragonimiasis
2533. Microscopy of an extracted tooth detected destruction of enamel and dentinoenamel junction; dentinal tubules are wide and filled with microbial masses. Odontoblastic processes are dystrophic and necrotic. There are foci of dentin demineralization. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Fluorosis
*b. Median caries
c. Cemental caries
d. Superficial caries
e. Deep caries
2534. Microscopy of an extracted tooth detected destruction of enamel and dentinoenamel junction; dentinal tubules are wide and filled with microbial masses. Odontoblastic processes are dystrophic and necrotic. There are foci of dentin demineralization. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Fluorosis
b. Cemental caries
*c. Median caries
d. Deep caries
e. Superficial caries
2535. Microscopy of an extracted tooth detected destruction of enamel and dentinoenamel junction; dentinal tubules are wide and filled with microbial masses. Odontoblastic processes are dystrophic and necrotic. There are foci of dentin demineralization. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Superficial caries
b. Fluorosis
c. Cemental caries
d. Deep caries
*e. Median caries
2536. Microscopy of an extracted tooth shows decreased count and size of odontoblasts and other cells of the dental pulp, with characteristically sclerotic connective tissue that makes up the pulp. What general pathology can be suspected in the dental pulp?
a. Amyloidosis
b. Fatty degeneration
*c. Reticular atrophy of the pulp
d. Hyalinosis
e. Pulpal hyperplasia
2537. Microscopy of an extracted tooth shows decreased count and size of odontoblasts and other cells of the dental pulp, with characteristically sclerotic connective tissue that makes up the pulp. What general pathology can be suspected in the dental pulp?
a. Amyloidosis
b. Fatty degeneration
c. Hyalinosis
*d. Reticular atrophy of the pulp
e. Pulpal hyperplasia
2538. Microscopy of an extracted tooth shows decreased count and size of odontoblasts and other cells of the dental pulp, with characteristically sclerotic connective tissue that makes up the pulp. What general pathology can be suspected in the dental pulp?
a. Pulpal hyperplasia
b. Hyalinosis
c. Amyloidosis
d. Fatty degeneration
*e. Reticular atrophy of the pulp
2539. Microscopy of the samples obtained from the patient's pharynx and stained according to Neisser shows bacilli with thickened poles situated at an angle to each other. Name the likely species of these microorganisms:
*a. Corynebacterium diphtheriae
b. Neisseria gonorrhoeae
c. Streptococcus pyogenes
d. Leptospira interrhogans
e. Mycobacterium tuberculosis
2540. Microscopy of the samples obtained from the patient's pharynx and stained according to Neisser shows bacilli with thickened poles situated at an angle to each other. Name the likely species of these microorganisms:
*a. Corynebacterium diphtheriae
b. Streptococcus pyogenes
c. Leptospira interrhogans
d. Neisseria gonorrhoeae
e. Mycobacterium tuberculosis
2541. Microscopy of the samples obtained from the patient's pharynx and stained according to Neisser shows bacilli with thickened poles situated at an angle to each other. Name the likely species of these microorganisms:
a. Mycobacterium tuberculosis
b. Streptococcus pyogenes
c. Leptospira interrhogans
d. Neisseria gonorrhoeae
*e. Corynebacterium diphtheriae
2542. Microscopy with an immersion system was used to study a smear microslide with a Streptobacillus culture stained according to the Aujeszky method. What structural feature of the bacteria was analyzed?
a. Capsule
b. Inclusions
c. Flagella
d. Cell wall structure
*e. Spores
2543. Microscopy with an immersion system was used to study a smear microslide with a Streptobacillus culture stained according to the Aujeszky method. What structural feature of the bacteria was analyzed?
a. Cell wall structure
*b. Spores
c. Flagella
d. Capsule
e. Inclusions
2544. Microscopy with an immersion system was used to study a smear microslide with a Streptobacillus culture stained according to the Aujeszky method. What structural feature of the bacteria was analyzed?
a. Cell wall structure
b. Inclusions
*c. Spores
d. Capsule
e. Flagella
2545. Microslide of a CNS organ impregnated with silver shows piriform cells. The cells are aligned in a row, 3-4 cellular processes branch off from the apices of the cells. These processes branch out further and form nearly two-dimensional layers. Name these cells:
*a. Purkinje cells
b. Betz cells
c. Golgi cells
d. Dogiel cells
e. Martinotti cells
2546. Microslide of a CNS organ impregnated with silver shows piriform cells. The cells are aligned in a row, 3-4 cellular processes branch off from the apices of the cells. These processes branch out further and form nearly two-dimensional layers. Name these cells:
a. Dogiel cells
*b. Purkinje cells
c. Martinotti cells
d. Golgi cells
e. Betz cells
2547. Microslide of a CNS organ impregnated with silver shows piriform cells. The cells are aligned in a row, 3-4 cellular processes branch off from the apices of the cells. These processes branch out further and form nearly two-dimensional layers. Name these cells:
a. Martinotti cells
*b. Purkinje cells
c. Betz cells
d. Golgi cells
e. Dogiel cells
2548. Microslide of a cardiac tissue shows rectangular cells with central location of the nucleus and well-developed myofibrils connected with Z-disks. These cells perform the following cardiac function:
*a. Contraction
b. Impulse conduction
c. Endocrine
d. Protective
e. Regenerative
2549. Microslide of a cardiac tissue shows rectangular cells with central location of the nucleus and well-developed myofibrils connected with Z-disks. These cells perform the following cardiac function:
*a. Contraction
b. Regenerative
c. Protective
d. Impulse conduction
e. Endocrine
2550. Microslide of a cardiac tissue shows rectangular cells with central location of the nucleus and well-developed myofibrils connected with Z-disks. These cells perform the following cardiac function:
a. Protective
b. Impulse conduction
c. Regenerative
d. Endocrine
*e. Contraction
2551. Miners' work at the coal-face often leads to development of anthracosis. What type of respiratory failure arises along with this disease?
*a. Restrictive
b. Dysregulatory
c. Thoracic
d. Diaphragmatic
e. Obstructive
2552. Miners' work at the coal-face often leads to development of anthracosis. What type of respiratory failure arises along with this disease?
a. Diaphragmatic
b. Dysregulatory
c. Obstructive
d. Thoracic
*e. Restrictive
2553. Miners' work at the coal-face often leads to development of anthracosis. What type of respiratory failure arises along with this disease?
a. Obstructive
*b. Restrictive
c. Thoracic
d. Dysregulatory
e. Diaphragmatic
2554. Mitochondrial respiratory chain contains complex cytochrome proteins in its structure. What type of reactions do they catalyze?
*a. Redox
b. Decarboxylation
c. Transamination
d. Deamination
e. Hydration
2555. Mitochondrial respiratory chain contains complex cytochrome proteins in its structure. What type of reactions do they catalyze?
a. Hydration
b. Deamination
c. Transamination
*d. Redox
e. Decarboxylation
2556. Mitochondrial respiratory chain contains complex cytochrome proteins in its structure. What type of reactions do they catalyze?
a. Hydration
b. Transamination
c. Decarboxylation
*d. Redox
e. Deamination
2557. Most epithelial cells sampled from the oral mucosa of a man contained one X chromatin body. It is characteristic of:
a. Down syndrome
b. Turner syndrome
c. Triple X syndrome
*d. Klinefelter syndrome
e. Triple Y syndrome
2558. Most epithelial cells sampled from the oral mucosa of a man contained one X chromatin body. It is characteristic of:
a. Triple X syndrome
b. Down syndrome
*c. Klinefelter syndrome
d. Turner syndrome
e. Triple Y syndrome
2559. Most epithelial cells sampled from the oral mucosa of a man contained one X chromatin body. It is characteristic of:
a. Triple X syndrome
b. Turner syndrome
c. Triple Y syndrome
d. Down syndrome
*e. Klinefelter syndrome
2560. Mother of a 2-year-old child with delayed physical and mental development has made an appointment with the genetic consultation. What method allows the doctor to rule out chromosomal abnormalities?
*a. Cytogenetic
b. Biochemical
c. Genealogical
d. Population statistics
e. Cytological
2561. Mother of a 2-year-old child with delayed physical and mental development has made an appointment with the genetic consultation. What method allows the doctor to rule out chromosomal abnormalities?
a. Population statistics
b. Biochemical
*c. Cytogenetic
d. Genealogical
e. Cytological
2562. Mother of a 2-year-old child with delayed physical and mental development has made an appointment with the genetic consultation. What method allows the doctor to rule out chromosomal abnormalities?
a. Population statistics
b. Genealogical
c. Biochemical
d. Cytological
*e. Cytogenetic
2563. Mother of a 4-year-old child complains that the child developed elevated body temperature, tenesmus, diarrhea, and abdominal pain attacks. The child attends a preschool facility. Laboratory analysis detected mucus and blood admixtures in the child's feces. Name the changes that occur in the gastrointestinal tract during dysentery:
a. Gastroenteritis
*b. Colitis
c. Enteritis
d. Enterocolitis
e. Gastritis
2564. Mother of a 4-year-old child complains that the child developed elevated body temperature, tenesmus, diarrhea, and abdominal pain attacks. The child attends a preschool facility. Laboratory analysis detected mucus and blood admixtures in the child's feces. Name the changes that occur in the gastrointestinal tract during dysentery:
a. Gastroenteritis
b. Enteritis
c. Enterocolitis
d. Gastritis
*e. Colitis
2565. Mother of a newborn has made an appointment with a neonatologist. The neonatologist determined that the child has brain maldevelopments. What has likely been damaged in the process of embryonic development?
*a. Ectoderm
b. Endoderm
c. Mesenchyme
d. -
e. Mesoderm
2566. Mother of a newborn has made an appointment with a neonatologist. The neonatologist determined that the child has brain maldevelopments. What has likely been damaged in the process of embryonic development?
a. Endoderm
b. Mesoderm
*c. Ectoderm
d. -
e. Mesenchyme
2567. Mother of a newborn has made an appointment with a neonatologist. The neonatologist determined that the child has brain maldevelopments. What has likely been damaged in the process of embryonic development?
a. Mesenchyme
b. Endoderm
c. Mesoderm
*d. Ectoderm
e. -
2568. Mother with a 12-year-old child came to the gastroenterologist. She complains of loss of appetite and meteorism in her child. Endoscopically the child was diagnosed with biliary dyskinesia, in the duodenal contents there were pear-shaped protozoa with two nuclei and multiple flagella. What disease is the most likely in this child?
*a. Lambliasis
b. Amebiasis
c. Balantidiasis
d. Toxoplasmosis
e. Trichomoniasis
2569. Mother with a 12-year-old child came to the gastroenterologist. She complains of loss of appetite and meteorism in her child. Endoscopically the child was diagnosed with biliary dyskinesia, in the duodenal contents there were pear-shaped protozoa with two nuclei and multiple flagella. What disease is the most likely in this child?
*a. Lambliasis
b. Trichomoniasis
c. Amebiasis
d. Toxoplasmosis
e. Balantidiasis
2570. Mother with a 12-year-old child came to the gastroenterologist. She complains of loss of appetite and meteorism in her child. Endoscopically the child was diagnosed with biliary dyskinesia, in the duodenal contents there were pear-shaped protozoa with two nuclei and multiple flagella. What disease is the most likely in this child?
a. Trichomoniasis
b. Amebiasis
c. Balantidiasis
d. Toxoplasmosis
*e. Lambliasis
2571. Mucin aggregates retain water, which results in their viscosity and protective action. It is possible because mucin structure contains:
a. Homopolysaccharides
b. Glucose
*c. Glycosaminoglycans
d. Oligosaccharides
e. Disaccharides
2572. Mucin aggregates retain water, which results in their viscosity and protective action. It is possible because mucin structure contains:
a. Oligosaccharides
*b. Glycosaminoglycans
c. Glucose
d. Homopolysaccharides
e. Disaccharides
2573. Mucin aggregates retain water, which results in their viscosity and protective action. It is possible because mucin structure contains:
a. Oligosaccharides
*b. Glycosaminoglycans
c. Homopolysaccharides
d. Disaccharides
e. Glucose
2574. Name the dental tissue that is similar to bone tissue in terms of its development source, morphological organization, and mineralization degree:
a. Periodontium
b. Acellular cementum
*c. Cellular cementum
d. Enamel
e. Pulp
2575. Name the dental tissue that is similar to bone tissue in terms of its development source, morphological organization, and mineralization degree:
a. Periodontium
b. Enamel
c. Pulp
d. Acellular cementum
*e. Cellular cementum
2576. Name the dental tissue that is similar to bone tissue in terms of its development source, morphological organization, and mineralization degree:
a. Pulp
b. Acellular cementum
*c. Cellular cementum
d. Enamel
e. Periodontium
2577. Name the state of the biosphere, where the human mental activity is the key developmental factor:
*a. Noosphere
b. Hydrosphere
c. Lithosphere
d. Atmosphere
e. Troposphere
2578. Name the state of the biosphere, where the human mental activity is the key developmental factor:
a. Lithosphere
*b. Noosphere
c. Troposphere
d. Hydrosphere
e. Atmosphere
2579. Name the state of the biosphere, where the human mental activity is the key developmental factor:
a. Troposphere
b. Lithosphere
*c. Noosphere
d. Hydrosphere
e. Atmosphere
2580. Neutrophils were detected in the histoslides of connective tissue. What function do these cells perform when they migrate from the blood to the tissues?
a. Blood vessel dilation
b. Trophic function
*c. Phagocytosis of microorganisms
d. Support function
e. Regulation of contraction of smooth  myocytes
2581. Neutrophils were detected in the histoslides of connective tissue. What function do these cells perform when they migrate from the blood to the tissues?
a. Regulation of contraction of smooth  myocytes
b. Trophic function
c. Support function
*d. Phagocytosis of microorganisms
e. Blood vessel dilation
2582. Neutrophils were detected in the histoslides of connective tissue. What function do these cells perform when they migrate from the blood to the tissues?
a. Trophic function
b. Support function
c. Regulation of contraction of smooth  myocytes
d. Blood vessel dilation
*e. Phagocytosis of microorganisms
2583. Nitrogen(II) oxide is an unstable molecule that takes part in vasodilation, immune processes, and neurotransmission. What enzyme participates in formation of nitrogen(II) oxide from arginine?
a. Argininosuccinate lyase
*b. NO-synthase
c. Arginase
d. Ornithine carbamoyl transferase
e. Argininosuccinate synthetase
2584. Nitrogen(II) oxide is an unstable molecule that takes part in vasodilation, immune processes, and neurotransmission. What enzyme participates in formation of nitrogen(II) oxide from arginine?
a. Ornithine carbamoyl transferase
b. Argininosuccinate lyase
c. Argininosuccinate synthetase
*d. NO-synthase
e. Arginase
2585. Nitrogen(II) oxide is an unstable molecule that takes part in vasodilation, immune processes, and neurotransmission. What enzyme participates in formation of nitrogen(II) oxide from arginine?
a. Ornithine carbamoyl transferase
b. Argininosuccinate synthetase
c. Argininosuccinate lyase
*d. NO-synthase
e. Arginase
2586. No nitrogenous base of a DNA codon can be a component of another codon. What characteristic of the genetic code is it?
*a. Non-overlapping
b. Collinearity
c. Triplet structure
d. Universality
e. Specificity
2587. No nitrogenous base of a DNA codon can be a component of another codon. What characteristic of the genetic code is it?
*a. Non-overlapping
b. Universality
c. Collinearity
d. Triplet structure
e. Specificity
2588. No nitrogenous base of a DNA codon can be a component of another codon. What characteristic of the genetic code is it?
*a. Non-overlapping
b. Universality
c. Triplet structure
d. Specificity
e. Collinearity
2589. Normal cardiomiocytes have a specific phase of the action potential:
*a. Slow repolarization (plateau)
b. Systolic repolarization
c. Rapid systolic repolarization
d. Slow dyastolic repolarization
e. Rapid dyastolic repolarization
2590. Normal cardiomiocytes have a specific phase of the action potential:
a. Rapid dyastolic repolarization
*b. Slow repolarization (plateau)
c. Slow dyastolic repolarization
d. Rapid systolic repolarization
e. Systolic repolarization
2591. Normal cardiomiocytes have a specific phase of the action potential:
a. Systolic repolarization
b. Rapid systolic repolarization
*c. Slow repolarization (plateau)
d. Rapid dyastolic repolarization
e. Slow dyastolic repolarization
2592. Normal occlusion of the dental arches can be made more pronounced by pulling the lower jaw backwards. What muscle performs this action?
*a. Temporal
b. Sternocleidomastoid
c. Medial pterygoid
d. Lateral pterygoid
e. Masseter
2593. Normal occlusion of the dental arches can be made more pronounced by pulling the lower jaw backwards. What muscle performs this action?
a. Lateral pterygoid
b. Sternocleidomastoid
*c. Temporal
d. Medial pterygoid
e. Masseter
2594. Normal occlusion of the dental arches can be made more pronounced by pulling the lower jaw backwards. What muscle performs this action?
a. Medial pterygoid
*b. Temporal
c. Lateral pterygoid
d. Sternocleidomastoid
e. Masseter
2595. Numerous substances dangerous to the body can get into the oral cavity with water and food. What components of saliva and gingival fluid provide protection against these compounds?
a. Alkaline and acid phosphatase
*b. Lysozyme, immunoglobulins,  leukocytes
c. Lactic acid, urea, ammonia
d. Lactate dehydrogenase, glucuronidase
e. Hyaluronidase, cathepsin D
2596. Numerous substances dangerous to the body can get into the oral cavity with water and food. What components of saliva and gingival fluid provide protection against these compounds?
a. Lactate dehydrogenase, glucuronidase
b. Lactic acid, urea, ammonia
c. Hyaluronidase, cathepsin D
d. Alkaline and acid phosphatase
*e. Lysozyme, immunoglobulins,  leukocytes
2597. Numerous substances dangerous to the body can get into the oral cavity with water and food. What components of saliva and gingival fluid provide protection against these compounds?
a. Lactic acid, urea, ammonia
b. Alkaline and acid phosphatase
c. Hyaluronidase, cathepsin D
*d. Lysozyme, immunoglobulins,  leukocytes
e. Lactate dehydrogenase, glucuronidase
2598. Often the cause of secondary immunodeficiency is an infectious affection of an organism, when agents reproduce directly in the cells of immune system and destroy them. Specify the diseases, during which the described above occurs:
a. Poliomyelitis, viral hepatitis type A
b. Dysentery, cholera
*c. Infectious mononucleosis, AIDS
d. Q fever, typhus
e. Tuberculosis, mycobacteriosis
2599. Often the cause of secondary immunodeficiency is an infectious affection of an organism, when agents reproduce directly in the cells of immune system and destroy them. Specify the diseases, during which the described above occurs:
a. Poliomyelitis, viral hepatitis type A
b. Q fever, typhus
c. Dysentery, cholera
d. Tuberculosis, mycobacteriosis
*e. Infectious mononucleosis, AIDS
2600. Often the cause of secondary immunodeficiency is an infectious affection of an organism, when agents reproduce directly in the cells of immune system and destroy them. Specify the diseases, during which the described above occurs:
a. Tuberculosis, mycobacteriosis
b. Poliomyelitis, viral hepatitis type A
c. Q fever, typhus
*d. Infectious mononucleosis, AIDS
e. Dysentery, cholera
2601. On an electronic microphotograph of epithelial tissue a certain structure can be identified. The structure is located under the epithelial cells and shaped like a three-dimensional reticulum. Name this structure:
*a. Basement membrane
b. Desmosome
c. Lamina propria
d. Cytolemma
e. Hemidesmosome
2602. On an electronic microphotograph of epithelial tissue a certain structure can be identified. The structure is located under the epithelial cells and shaped like a three-dimensional reticulum. Name this structure:
a. Cytolemma
*b. Basement membrane
c. Hemidesmosome
d. Desmosome
e. Lamina propria
2603. On an electronic microphotograph of epithelial tissue a certain structure can be identified. The structure is located under the epithelial cells and shaped like a three-dimensional reticulum. Name this structure:
a. Desmosome
*b. Basement membrane
c. Cytolemma
d. Lamina propria
e. Hemidesmosome
2604. On autopsy of a 69-year-old woman, who for a long time had been suffering from hypertension, the pathologist determined that both of her kidneys are dense, markedly diminished, with fine-grained surface. These changes are indicative of:
a. Compression atrophy
*b. Atrophy due to inadequate blood supply
c. Senile renal atrophy
d. Dysfunctional atrophy
e. Hypoplasia
2605. On autopsy of a 69-year-old woman, who for a long time had been suffering from hypertension, the pathologist determined that both of her kidneys are dense, markedly diminished, with fine-grained surface. These changes are indicative of:
a. Dysfunctional atrophy
*b. Atrophy due to inadequate blood supply
c. Senile renal atrophy
d. Compression atrophy
e. Hypoplasia
2606. On autopsy of a 69-year-old woman, who for a long time had been suffering from hypertension, the pathologist determined that both of her kidneys are dense, markedly diminished, with fine-grained surface. These changes are indicative of:
a. Senile renal atrophy
*b. Atrophy due to inadequate blood supply
c. Hypoplasia
d. Compression atrophy
e. Dysfunctional atrophy
2607. On clinical examination a woman presents with excessive sweating, tachycardia, loss of weight, and tremor. What endocrine pathology can cause these signs?
a. Hypergonadism
b. Hypogonadism
c. Hypoaldosteronism
*d. Hyperthyroidism
e. Hypothyroidism
2608. On clinical examination a woman presents with excessive sweating, tachycardia, loss of weight, and tremor. What endocrine pathology can cause these signs?
a. Hypothyroidism
b. Hypoaldosteronism
*c. Hyperthyroidism
d. Hypogonadism
e. Hypergonadism
2609. On examination a woman was diagnosed with a retropharyngeal abscess. What cervical space should be accessed by the surgeon lancing this abscess?
*a. Retrovisceral space
b. Prescalene space
c. Interscalene space
d. Previsceral space
e. Suprasternal space
2610. On examination a woman was diagnosed with a retropharyngeal abscess. What cervical space should be accessed by the surgeon lancing this abscess?
a. Prescalene space
b. Interscalene space
*c. Retrovisceral space
d. Previsceral space
e. Suprasternal space
2611. On histological examination of biopsy material taken from the liver of a woman, who for a long time had been suffering from viral hepatitis type B, the pathologist detected diffuse hepatic fibrosis with formation of porto-portal and porto-central fibrotic septa and disturbance of the liver lobular structure (development of pseudolobules). What process can be characterized by the given morphological changes?
*a. Hepatic cirrhosis
b. Chronic hepatitis
c. Cholestasis
d. Hepatocellular carcinoma
e. Acute hepatitis
2612. On histological examination of biopsy material taken from the liver of a woman, who for a long time had been suffering from viral hepatitis type B, the pathologist detected diffuse hepatic fibrosis with formation of porto-portal and porto-central fibrotic septa and disturbance of the liver lobular structure (development of pseudolobules). What process can be characterized by the given morphological changes?
a. Acute hepatitis
b. Hepatocellular carcinoma
*c. Hepatic cirrhosis
d. Chronic hepatitis
e. Cholestasis
2613. On histological examination of biopsy material taken from the liver of a woman, who for a long time had been suffering from viral hepatitis type B, the pathologist detected diffuse hepatic fibrosis with formation of porto-portal and porto-central fibrotic septa and disturbance of the liver lobular structure (development of pseudolobules). What process can be characterized by the given morphological changes?
a. Chronic hepatitis
*b. Hepatic cirrhosis
c. Cholestasis
d. Acute hepatitis
e. Hepatocellular carcinoma
2614. On the day before a surgery, the patient was stressed out. This condition is associated with high blood levels of the following hormone:
a. Glucagon
b. Insulin
*c. Adrenaline
d. Progesterone
e. Prolactin
2615. On the day before a surgery, the patient was stressed out. This condition is associated with high blood levels of the following hormone:
a. Glucagon
b. Insulin
c. Progesterone
d. Prolactin
*e. Adrenaline
2616. On the day before a surgery, the patient was stressed out. This condition is associated with high blood levels of the following hormone:
a. Prolactin
b. Insulin
c. Progesterone
d. Glucagon
*e. Adrenaline
2617. On tooth section in the area of the root apex there is a tissue consisting of cells with processes surrounded by mineralized intercellular substance. Name this tissue:
a. Mantle dentin
b. Enamel
c. Reticulofibrous bone tissue
*d. Cellular cement
e. Periodontium
2618. On tooth section in the area of the root apex there is a tissue consisting of cells with processes surrounded by mineralized intercellular substance. Name this tissue:
a. Periodontium
*b. Cellular cement
c. Enamel
d. Mantle dentin
e. Reticulofibrous bone tissue
2619. On tooth section in the area of the root apex there is a tissue consisting of cells with processes surrounded by mineralized intercellular substance. Name this tissue:
a. Periodontium
*b. Cellular cement
c. Enamel
d. Reticulofibrous bone tissue
e. Mantle dentin
2620. One of the listed amino acids with a hydroxyl group plays the largest role in the formation of the structure of collagen and organic matrix of the tooth. What amino acid is it?
a. Serine
b. Tyrosine
c. Homoserine
*d. Oxyproline
e. Threonine
2621. One of the listed amino acids with a hydroxyl group plays the largest role in the formation of the structure of collagen and organic matrix of the tooth. What amino acid is it?
a. Serine
b. Tyrosine
c. Threonine
d. Homoserine
*e. Oxyproline
2622. One of the listed amino acids with a hydroxyl group plays the largest role in the formation of the structure of collagen and organic matrix of the tooth. What amino acid is it?
a. Threonine
*b. Oxyproline
c. Tyrosine
d. Serine
e. Homoserine
2623. Oral cavity examination reveals gingival retraction with exposed roots and cervices of the lower incisors. X-ray shows osteoporotic foci in the alveolar bone; smooth resorption of the bone tissue is prevalent. Microscopy of gingival tissues shows sclerosis and hyalinosis of the microvasculature, accompanied by luminal obliteration; the capillary network is reduced; connective tissue undergoes dystrophic changes. What pathological process was detected?
*a. Parodontosis
b. Osteomyelitis
c. Parodontitis
d. Periodontitis
e. Periostitis
2624. Oral cavity examination reveals gingival retraction with exposed roots and cervices of the lower incisors. X-ray shows osteoporotic foci in the alveolar bone; smooth resorption of the bone tissue is prevalent. Microscopy of gingival tissues shows sclerosis and hyalinosis of the microvasculature, accompanied by luminal obliteration; the capillary network is reduced; connective tissue undergoes dystrophic changes. What pathological process was detected?
*a. Parodontosis
b. Periostitis
c. Parodontitis
d. Osteomyelitis
e. Periodontitis
2625. Oral cavity examination reveals gingival retraction with exposed roots and cervices of the lower incisors. X-ray shows osteoporotic foci in the alveolar bone; smooth resorption of the bone tissue is prevalent. Microscopy of gingival tissues shows sclerosis and hyalinosis of the microvasculature, accompanied by luminal obliteration; the capillary network is reduced; connective tissue undergoes dystrophic changes. What pathological process was detected?
a. Periodontitis
b. Periostitis
c. Parodontitis
*d. Parodontosis
e. Osteomyelitis
2626. Oral examination of a child revealed that the first upper molars have already erupted. What is the age of this child?
*a. 6-7 years
b. 10-11 years
c. 8-9 years
d. 12-13 years
e. 4-5 years
2627. Oral examination of a child revealed that the first upper molars have already erupted. What is the age of this child?
*a. 6-7 years
b. 12-13 years
c. 4-5 years
d. 8-9 years
e. 10-11 years
2628. Oral examination of a child revealed that the first upper molars have already erupted. What is the age of this child?
a. 8-9 years
b. 12-13 years
c. 4-5 years
*d. 6-7 years
e. 10-11 years
2629. Oral examination revealed dark yellow and brown spots and stripes on the labial and lingual surfaces of the patent's teeth; more than the half of the dental surface is affected; enamel and dentin are destroyed. What diagnosis is the most likely?
*a. Fluorosis
b. Dystrophic calcification
c. Cuneiform defect
d. Dental calculus
e. Metastatic calcification
2630. Oral examination revealed dark yellow and brown spots and stripes on the labial and lingual surfaces of the patent's teeth; more than the half of the dental surface is affected; enamel and dentin are destroyed. What diagnosis is the most likely?
a. Cuneiform defect
b. Dental calculus
*c. Fluorosis
d. Metastatic calcification
e. Dystrophic calcification
2631. Oral examination revealed dark yellow and brown spots and stripes on the labial and lingual surfaces of the patent's teeth; more than the half of the dental surface is affected; enamel and dentin are destroyed. What diagnosis is the most likely?
a. Cuneiform defect
b. Metastatic calcification
*c. Fluorosis
d. Dystrophic calcification
e. Dental calculus
2632. Oral examination reveals marked reddening of mucosa at the root of the tongue. What structure is involved in the inflammatory process?
a. Palatine tonsil
b. Tonsil of torus tubaris
c. Veil of palate
d. Pharyngeal tonsil
*e. Lingual tonsil
2633. Oral examination reveals marked reddening of mucosa at the root of the tongue. What structure is involved in the inflammatory process?
a. Pharyngeal tonsil
b. Palatine tonsil
*c. Lingual tonsil
d. Veil of palate
e. Tonsil of torus tubaris
2634. Oral examination reveals marked reddening of mucosa at the root of the tongue. What structure is involved in the inflammatory process?
a. Veil of palate
*b. Lingual tonsil
c. Pharyngeal tonsil
d. Palatine tonsil
e. Tonsil of torus tubaris
2635. Ossification of the annular stapedial ligament occurred in a patient with hearing impairment. What is this type of connection called?
*a. Syndesmosis
b. Hemiarthrosis
c. Gomphosis
d. Synchondrosis
e. Synostosis
2636. Ossification of the annular stapedial ligament occurred in a patient with hearing impairment. What is this type of connection called?
a. Synchondrosis
*b. Syndesmosis
c. Hemiarthrosis
d. Gomphosis
e. Synostosis
2637. Ossification of the annular stapedial ligament occurred in a patient with hearing impairment. What is this type of connection called?
a. Synostosis
b. Gomphosis
c. Synchondrosis
d. Hemiarthrosis
*e. Syndesmosis
2638. Oxidative decarboxylation of pyruvic acid is catalyzed by a multienzyme complex with several functionally linked coenzymes. Name this complex:
*a. Thymidine diphosphate (TDP), flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD), coenzyme A (CoASH), nicotine amide adenine dinucleotide (NAD), lipoic acid
b. Flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD), tetrahydrofolic acid, pyridoxal-5-phosphate, thymidine diphosphate (TDP), choline
c. Coenzyme A (CoASH), flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD), pyridoxal-5-phosphate, tetrahydrofolic acid, carnitine
d. Lipoic acid, tetrahydrofolic acid, pyridoxal-5-phosphate, methylcobalamin
e. Nicotine amide adenine dinucleotide (NAD), pyridoxal-5-phosphate, thymidine diphosphate (TDP), methylcobalamin, biotin
2639. Oxidative decarboxylation of pyruvic acid is catalyzed by a multienzyme complex with several functionally linked coenzymes. Name this complex:
a. Coenzyme A (CoASH), flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD), pyridoxal-5-phosphate, tetrahydrofolic acid, carnitine
b. Flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD), tetrahydrofolic acid, pyridoxal-5-phosphate, thymidine diphosphate (TDP), choline
*c. Thymidine diphosphate (TDP), flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD), coenzyme A (CoASH), nicotine amide adenine dinucleotide (NAD), lipoic acid
d. Lipoic acid, tetrahydrofolic acid, pyridoxal-5-phosphate, methylcobalamin
e. Nicotine amide adenine dinucleotide (NAD), pyridoxal-5-phosphate, thymidine diphosphate (TDP), methylcobalamin, biotin
2640. Oxidative decarboxylation of pyruvic acid is catalyzed by a multienzyme complex with several functionally linked coenzymes. Name this complex:
a. Flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD), tetrahydrofolic acid, pyridoxal-5-phosphate, thymidine diphosphate (TDP), choline
b. Nicotine amide adenine dinucleotide (NAD), pyridoxal-5-phosphate, thymidine diphosphate (TDP), methylcobalamin, biotin
c. Coenzyme A (CoASH), flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD), pyridoxal-5-phosphate, tetrahydrofolic acid, carnitine
*d. Thymidine diphosphate (TDP), flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD), coenzyme A (CoASH), nicotine amide adenine dinucleotide (NAD), lipoic acid
e. Lipoic acid, tetrahydrofolic acid, pyridoxal-5-phosphate, methylcobalamin
2641. Patients with ischemic heart disease are prescribed small doses of aspirin that inhibits the synthesis of platelet aggregation activator thromboxane A2. What substance is thromboxane A2 made of?
*a. Arachidonic acid
b. Malonic acid
c. Glutamic acid
d. Acetic acid
e. Homogentisic acid
2642. Patients with ischemic heart disease are prescribed small doses of aspirin that inhibits the synthesis of platelet aggregation activator thromboxane A2. What substance is thromboxane A2 made of?
a. Acetic acid
b. Malonic acid
c. Homogentisic acid
d. Glutamic acid
*e. Arachidonic acid
2643. Patients with ischemic heart disease are prescribed small doses of aspirin that inhibits the synthesis of platelet aggregation activator thromboxane A2. What substance is thromboxane A2 made of?
a. Homogentisic acid
*b. Arachidonic acid
c. Glutamic acid
d. Malonic acid
e. Acetic acid
2644. Pediatric examination of a 10-year-old child detected numerous petechiae on the skin, bleeding gums, and low levels of vitamin C in urine. What process is disturbed in this case?
a. Hyaluronidase activation
b. Proteoglycan breakdown
c. Collagen breakdown
*d. Collagen synthesis
e. Proteoglycan synthesis
2645. Pediatric examination of a 10-year-old child detected numerous petechiae on the skin, bleeding gums, and low levels of vitamin C in urine. What process is disturbed in this case?
a. Proteoglycan breakdown
*b. Collagen synthesis
c. Proteoglycan synthesis
d. Collagen breakdown
e. Hyaluronidase activation
2646. Pediatric examination of a 10-year-old child detected numerous petechiae on the skin, bleeding gums, and low levels of vitamin C in urine. What process is disturbed in this case?
a. Proteoglycan breakdown
b. Collagen breakdown
*c. Collagen synthesis
d. Hyaluronidase activation
e. Proteoglycan synthesis
2647. People of various nationalities, who live in the Arctic climate, develop a number of features to adapt to their environment. Representatives of the Arctic adaptive type compared to the natives of the Central Africa have the following characteristic feature:
*a. Increased layer of subcutaneous fat
b. Hyperhidrosis
c. Lean stature
d. Lower need for fat intake
e. Elongated legs and shorter arms
2648. People of various nationalities, who live in the Arctic climate, develop a number of features to adapt to their environment. Representatives of the Arctic adaptive type compared to the natives of the Central Africa have the following characteristic feature:
a. Elongated legs and shorter arms
b. Lean stature
*c. Increased layer of subcutaneous fat
d. Lower need for fat intake
e. Hyperhidrosis
2649. People of various nationalities, who live in the Arctic climate, develop a number of features to adapt to their environment. Representatives of the Arctic adaptive type compared to the natives of the Central Africa have the following characteristic feature:
a. Lower need for fat intake
*b. Increased layer of subcutaneous fat
c. Elongated legs and shorter arms
d. Hyperhidrosis
e. Lean stature
2650. People with diseases of internal organs often assume forced positions (e.g. with lower limbs flexed and pressed to the abdomen) due to the following reflex response:
*a. Visceromotor
b. Dermatovisceral
c. Viscero-visceral
d. Motor-visceral
e. Viscerodermal
2651. People with diseases of internal organs often assume forced positions (e.g. with lower limbs flexed and pressed to the abdomen) due to the following reflex response:
a. Dermatovisceral
b. Viscerodermal
*c. Visceromotor
d. Motor-visceral
e. Viscero-visceral
2652. People with diseases of internal organs often assume forced positions (e.g. with lower limbs flexed and pressed to the abdomen) due to the following reflex response:
a. Viscerodermal
b. Viscero-visceral
*c. Visceromotor
d. Motor-visceral
e. Dermatovisceral
2653. Phenylketonuria belongs to the following group of molecular metabolic diseases:
a. Carbohydrate metabolism disorders
b. Hereditary disorders of lipid metabolism
c. Mineral metabolism disorders
d. Hereditary disorders of connective tissue metabolism
*e. Amino acid metabolism disorders
2654. Phenylketonuria belongs to the following group of molecular metabolic diseases:
a. Mineral metabolism disorders
b. Carbohydrate metabolism disorders
c. Hereditary disorders of lipid metabolism
d. Hereditary disorders of connective tissue metabolism
*e. Amino acid metabolism disorders
2655. Phenylketonuria belongs to the following group of molecular metabolic diseases:
a. Mineral metabolism disorders
b. Hereditary disorders of lipid metabolism
c. Hereditary disorders of connective tissue metabolism
*d. Amino acid metabolism disorders
e. Carbohydrate metabolism disorders
2656. Phenylketonuria has autosomal recessive pattern of inheritance. What parental genotypes result in the risk of phenylketonuria in their children?
a.   
b.   
c.   
d.   
*e.   
2657. Phenylketonuria has autosomal recessive pattern of inheritance. What parental genotypes result in the risk of phenylketonuria in their children?
a.   
*b.   
c.   
d.   
e.   
2658. Phenylketonuria has autosomal recessive pattern of inheritance. What parental genotypes result in the risk of phenylketonuria in their children?
a.   
b.   
*c.   
d.   
e.   
2659. Physiologists determined that erythrocyte blood count depends on the functional condition of red bone marrow and the life span of an erythrocyte. What is the average life span of an erythrocyte in the peripheral blood?
*a. 120 days
b. 70 days
c. 50 days
d. 220 days
e. 150 days
2660. Physiologists determined that erythrocyte blood count depends on the functional condition of red bone marrow and the life span of an erythrocyte. What is the average life span of an erythrocyte in the peripheral blood?
a. 220 days
b. 70 days
c. 50 days
*d. 120 days
e. 150 days
2661. Physiologists determined that erythrocyte blood count depends on the functional condition of red bone marrow and the life span of an erythrocyte. What is the average life span of an erythrocyte in the peripheral blood?
a. 50 days
b. 150 days
*c. 120 days
d. 70 days
e. 220 days
2662. Premature excitation that occurrs in the ventricular myocardium:
a. Increases the automaticity of the sinoatrial node
b. Increases the speed of excitation conduction through working cardiomyocytes
c. Reduces the automaticity of the sinoatrial node
d. Reduces the speed of excitation conduction through working cardiomyocytes
*e. Has no effect on the automaticity of the sinoatrial node
2663. Premature excitation that occurrs in the ventricular myocardium:
a. Reduces the automaticity of the sinoatrial node
b. Increases the speed of excitation conduction through working cardiomyocytes
*c. Has no effect on the automaticity of the sinoatrial node
d. Reduces the speed of excitation conduction through working cardiomyocytes
e. Increases the automaticity of the sinoatrial node
2664. Premature excitation that occurrs in the ventricular myocardium:
a. Reduces the speed of excitation conduction through working cardiomyocytes
*b. Has no effect on the automaticity of the sinoatrial node
c. Increases the automaticity of the sinoatrial node
d. Increases the speed of excitation conduction through working cardiomyocytes
e. Reduces the automaticity of the sinoatrial node
2665. Premature newborns have impaired surfactant synthesis. What is the function of a surfactant in the lungs?
a. Increases alveolar surface tension
*b. Reduces alveolar surface tension
c. Inhibits O_2 diffusion through the blood-air barrier
d. Facilitates diaphragmatic excursion
e. Increases airway resistance
2666. Premature newborns have impaired surfactant synthesis. What is the function of a surfactant in the lungs?
a. Inhibits O_2 diffusion through the blood-air barrier
b. Facilitates diaphragmatic excursion
c. Increases airway resistance
*d. Reduces alveolar surface tension
e. Increases alveolar surface tension
2667. Premature newborns have impaired surfactant synthesis. What is the function of a surfactant in the lungs?
a. Inhibits O_2 diffusion through the blood-air barrier
b. Increases alveolar surface tension
c. Facilitates diaphragmatic excursion
*d. Reduces alveolar surface tension
e. Increases airway resistance
2668. Presence of citrulline and high ammonia levels are detected in the urine of a newborn. This child is likely to present with disturbed production of the following substance:
a. Ammonia
b. Uric acid
c. Creatinine
d. Creatine
*e. Urea
2669. Presence of citrulline and high ammonia levels are detected in the urine of a newborn. This child is likely to present with disturbed production of the following substance:
a. Uric acid
*b. Urea
c. Ammonia
d. Creatinine
e. Creatine
2670. Presence of citrulline and high ammonia levels are detected in the urine of a newborn. This child is likely to present with disturbed production of the following substance:
a. Uric acid
b. Creatine
*c. Urea
d. Ammonia
e. Creatinine
2671. Prior to a complex surgery the patient developed skin pallor, rapid heart rate and respiration rate, elevated blood pressure, and dry mouth. These signs appeared due to activation of:
*a. Sympathetic nervous system
b. Parasympathetic nervous system
c. Somatic nervous system
d. Metasympathetic nervous system
e. -
2672. Prior to a complex surgery the patient developed skin pallor, rapid heart rate and respiration rate, elevated blood pressure, and dry mouth. These signs appeared due to activation of:
a. -
*b. Sympathetic nervous system
c. Metasympathetic nervous system
d. Somatic nervous system
e. Parasympathetic nervous system
2673. Prior to a complex surgery the patient developed skin pallor, rapid heart rate and respiration rate, elevated blood pressure, and dry mouth. These signs appeared due to activation of:
a. -
*b. Sympathetic nervous system
c. Parasympathetic nervous system
d. Metasympathetic nervous system
e. Somatic nervous system
2674. Prior to tooth extraction the patient was given a local anesthetic, lidocaine. What is the mechanism of anesthetic action of this drug?
a. Block of \beta_2-adrenergic receptors
*b. Sodium channels block
c. Stimulation of muscarinic acetylcholine receptors
d. Block of 1-histamine receptors
e. Stimulation of GABA receptors
2675. Prior to tooth extraction the patient was given a local anesthetic, lidocaine. What is the mechanism of anesthetic action of this drug?
a. Block of 1-histamine receptors
b. Stimulation of muscarinic acetylcholine receptors
c. Block of \beta_2-adrenergic receptors
*d. Sodium channels block
e. Stimulation of GABA receptors
2676. Prior to tooth extraction the patient was given a local anesthetic, lidocaine. What is the mechanism of anesthetic action of this drug?
a. Stimulation of GABA receptors
b. Block of \beta_2-adrenergic receptors
c. Stimulation of muscarinic acetylcholine receptors
*d. Sodium channels block
e. Block of 1-histamine receptors
2677. Prior to tooth extraction under a local anesthesia, the patient was tested for novocaine allergy. The test result was positive. What substance can be used to administer anesthesia in this case?
a. Acetylsalicylic acid
b. Procainamide
c. Sodium valproate
d. Analgin (Metamizole)
*e. Lidocaine
2678. Prior to tooth extraction under a local anesthesia, the patient was tested for novocaine allergy. The test result was positive. What substance can be used to administer anesthesia in this case?
a. Procainamide
b. Analgin (Metamizole)
c. Acetylsalicylic acid
*d. Lidocaine
e. Sodium valproate
2679. Prior to tooth extraction under a local anesthesia, the patient was tested for novocaine allergy. The test result was positive. What substance can be used to administer anesthesia in this case?
a. Procainamide
b. Sodium valproate
c. Analgin (Metamizole)
*d. Lidocaine
e. Acetylsalicylic acid
2680. Prolonged exposure of a human body to toxic substances has resulted in destruction of the organelles that perform protein synthesis in the hepatocytes. Name these organelles:
*a. Ribosomes
b. Lysosomes
c. Peroxisomes
d. Mitochondria
e. -
2681. Prolonged exposure of a human body to toxic substances has resulted in destruction of the organelles that perform protein synthesis in the hepatocytes. Name these organelles:
a. Mitochondria
b. Lysosomes
*c. Ribosomes
d. Peroxisomes
e. -
2682. Prolonged exposure of a human body to toxic substances has resulted in destruction of the organelles that perform protein synthesis in the hepatocytes. Name these organelles:
a. Peroxisomes
b. -
c. Lysosomes
d. Mitochondria
*e. Ribosomes
2683. Prolonged taking of large doses of aspirin (acetylsalicylic acid) leads to inhibition of prostaglandin synthesis because of decreased activity of the following enzyme:
*a. Cyclooxygenase
b. Phospholipase A2
c. 5-Lipoxygenase
d. Peroxidase
e. Phosphodiesterase
2684. Prolonged taking of large doses of aspirin (acetylsalicylic acid) leads to inhibition of prostaglandin synthesis because of decreased activity of the following enzyme:
*a. Cyclooxygenase
b. Phospholipase A2
c. Peroxidase
d. Phosphodiesterase
e. 5-Lipoxygenase
2685. Prolonged taking of large doses of aspirin (acetylsalicylic acid) leads to inhibition of prostaglandin synthesis because of decreased activity of the following enzyme:
a. Phospholipase A2
b. 5-Lipoxygenase
c. Peroxidase
*d. Cyclooxygenase
e. Phosphodiesterase
2686. Reading of hereditary information encoded within a gene begins with pre-mRNA synthesis on a fragment of DNA matrix chain. Where does this process occur in the eukaryotic cells?
a. Centrosomes
b. Golgi complex
*c. Nucleus
d. Cytoplasm
e. Ribosomes
2687. Reading of hereditary information encoded within a gene begins with pre-mRNA synthesis on a fragment of DNA matrix chain. Where does this process occur in the eukaryotic cells?
a. Centrosomes
b. Golgi complex
*c. Nucleus
d. Ribosomes
e. Cytoplasm
2688. Reading of hereditary information encoded within a gene begins with pre-mRNA synthesis on a fragment of DNA matrix chain. Where does this process occur in the eukaryotic cells?
a. Ribosomes
b. Cytoplasm
*c. Nucleus
d. Golgi complex
e. Centrosomes
2689. Rectal microscopy shows large necrotic foci on the mucosa. Necrotic masses are saturated with fibrin, forming a film. Mucosa and submucosa on the periphery of the necrotic foci are hyperemic, swollen, and have hemorrhages and leukocyte infiltrations. What disease can be suspected?
a. Amebiasis
*b. Dysentery
c. Salmonellosis
d. Cholera
e. Typhoid fever
2690. Rectal microscopy shows large necrotic foci on the mucosa. Necrotic masses are saturated with fibrin, forming a film. Mucosa and submucosa on the periphery of the necrotic foci are hyperemic, swollen, and have hemorrhages and leukocyte infiltrations. What disease can be suspected?
a. Cholera
b. Salmonellosis
c. Amebiasis
d. Typhoid fever
*e. Dysentery
2691. Rectal microscopy shows large necrotic foci on the mucosa. Necrotic masses are saturated with fibrin, forming a film. Mucosa and submucosa on the periphery of the necrotic foci are hyperemic, swollen, and have hemorrhages and leukocyte infiltrations. What disease can be suspected?
a. Salmonellosis
*b. Dysentery
c. Cholera
d. Amebiasis
e. Typhoid fever
2692. Replication is one of the reactions of matrix synthesis. What new molecule forms on the DNA molecule in the result of replication?
*a. DNA
b. rRNA
c. tRNA
d. mRNA
e. Pro-mRNA
2693. Replication is one of the reactions of matrix synthesis. What new molecule forms on the DNA molecule in the result of replication?
a. Pro-mRNA
b. mRNA
c. tRNA
*d. DNA
e. rRNA
2694. Replication is one of the reactions of matrix synthesis. What new molecule forms on the DNA molecule in the result of replication?
a. Pro-mRNA
b. tRNA
c. mRNA
*d. DNA
e. rRNA
2695. Resuscitation unit received a patient with acute poisoning caused by unidentified medicine. To quickly excrete the poison from the patient's body, forced diuresis was induced. What substance was used to perform this procedure?
*a. Furosemide
b. Hydrochlorothiazide
c. Spironolactone
d. Dithylinum (Suxamethonium chloride)
e. Omeprazole
2696. Resuscitation unit received a patient with acute poisoning caused by unidentified medicine. To quickly excrete the poison from the patient's body, forced diuresis was induced. What substance was used to perform this procedure?
a. Dithylinum (Suxamethonium chloride)
*b. Furosemide
c. Omeprazole
d. Spironolactone
e. Hydrochlorothiazide
2697. Resuscitation unit received a patient with acute poisoning caused by unidentified medicine. To quickly excrete the poison from the patient's body, forced diuresis was induced. What substance was used to perform this procedure?
a. Dithylinum (Suxamethonium chloride)
b. Omeprazole
c. Hydrochlorothiazide
d. Spironolactone
*e. Furosemide
2698. Rotenone is known to inhibit respiratory chain. What complex of mitochondrial respiratory chain is inhibited by this substance?
*a. NADH-coenzyme Q reductase
b. Adenosine triphosphate synthetase
c. Coenzyme Q - cytochrome c reductase
d. Cytochrome oxidase
e. Succinate-coenzyme Q reductase
2699. Rotenone is known to inhibit respiratory chain. What complex of mitochondrial respiratory chain is inhibited by this substance?
*a. NADH-coenzyme Q reductase
b. Succinate-coenzyme Q reductase
c. Adenosine triphosphate synthetase
d. Cytochrome oxidase
e. Coenzyme Q - cytochrome c reductase
2700. Rotenone is known to inhibit respiratory chain. What complex of mitochondrial respiratory chain is inhibited by this substance?
a. Adenosine triphosphate synthetase
b. Coenzyme Q - cytochrome c reductase
c. Cytochrome oxidase
*d. NADH-coenzyme Q reductase
e. Succinate-coenzyme Q reductase
2701. Secretory units of salivary glands are surrounded with specific contractile cells. Name these cells:
a. Ciliated cells
*b. Myoepithelial cells
c. Adipocytes
d. Pericytes
e. Endotheliocytes
2702. Secretory units of salivary glands are surrounded with specific contractile cells. Name these cells:
a. Ciliated cells
*b. Myoepithelial cells
c. Endotheliocytes
d. Pericytes
e. Adipocytes
2703. Secretory units of salivary glands are surrounded with specific contractile cells. Name these cells:
a. Ciliated cells
b. Pericytes
c. Adipocytes
*d. Myoepithelial cells
e. Endotheliocytes
2704. Serological diagnostics of infectious diseases is based on specific interaction between antibodies and antigens. When an antigen is sedimented from a solution, using an immune serum and an electrolyte, this reaction is called:
*a. Precipitation reaction
b. Neutralization reaction
c. Complement binding reaction
d. -
e. Hemadsorption reaction
2705. Serological diagnostics of infectious diseases is based on specific interaction between antibodies and antigens. When an antigen is sedimented from a solution, using an immune serum and an electrolyte, this reaction is called:
a. -
*b. Precipitation reaction
c. Hemadsorption reaction
d. Neutralization reaction
e. Complement binding reaction
2706. Serological diagnostics of infectious diseases is based on specific interaction between antibodies and antigens. When an antigen is sedimented from a solution, using an immune serum and an electrolyte, this reaction is called:
a. Hemadsorption reaction
b. Complement binding reaction
c. -
*d. Precipitation reaction
e. Neutralization reaction
2707. Several hours after the dental trauma the tooth pulp presents with hyperemic vessels, marked tissue edema with isolated neutrophils, lymphocytes, and minor dystrophic changes of nerve fibers. Make the diagnosis:
*a. Serous pulpitis
b. Suppurative pulpitis
c. Gangrenous pulpitis
d. Fibrous pulpitis
e. Granulating pulpitis
2708. Several hours after the dental trauma the tooth pulp presents with hyperemic vessels, marked tissue edema with isolated neutrophils, lymphocytes, and minor dystrophic changes of nerve fibers. Make the diagnosis:
a. Gangrenous pulpitis
b. Suppurative pulpitis
c. Granulating pulpitis
*d. Serous pulpitis
e. Fibrous pulpitis
2709. Several hours after the dental trauma the tooth pulp presents with hyperemic vessels, marked tissue edema with isolated neutrophils, lymphocytes, and minor dystrophic changes of nerve fibers. Make the diagnosis:
a. Granulating pulpitis
b. Suppurative pulpitis
*c. Serous pulpitis
d. Fibrous pulpitis
e. Gangrenous pulpitis
2710. Several patients with similar complaints came to the doctor. They all present with weakness, pain in the intestines, indigestion. Feces analysis revealed the need for urgent hospitalization of the patient, who had microbial cysts with four nuclei detected in his samples. Such cysts are characteristic of the following protozoon:
a. Balantidium
*b. Entamoeba histolytica
c. Entamoeba coli
d. Trichomonad
e. Lamblia
2711. Several patients with similar complaints came to the doctor. They all present with weakness, pain in the intestines, indigestion. Feces analysis revealed the need for urgent hospitalization of the patient, who had microbial cysts with four nuclei detected in his samples. Such cysts are characteristic of the following protozoon:
a. Entamoeba coli
b. Balantidium
c. Trichomonad
d. Lamblia
*e. Entamoeba histolytica
2712. Several patients with similar complaints came to the doctor. They all present with weakness, pain in the intestines, indigestion. Feces analysis revealed the need for urgent hospitalization of the patient, who had microbial cysts with four nuclei detected in his samples. Such cysts are characteristic of the following protozoon:
a. Entamoeba coli
b. Lamblia
*c. Entamoeba histolytica
d. Trichomonad
e. Balantidium
2713. Significant shortcoming of microscopy in infection diagnostics is its insufficient information value due to morphological similarity between many species of microorganisms. What immunoassay can significantly increase informativity of this method?
*a. Fluorescence immunoassay
b. Radioimmunoassay
c. Coombs' test
d. Opsonization
e. Immune-enzyme assay
2714. Significant shortcoming of microscopy in infection diagnostics is its insufficient information value due to morphological similarity between many species of microorganisms. What immunoassay can significantly increase informativity of this method?
a. Immune-enzyme assay
*b. Fluorescence immunoassay
c. Radioimmunoassay
d. Coombs' test
e. Opsonization
2715. Significant shortcoming of microscopy in infection diagnostics is its insufficient information value due to morphological similarity between many species of microorganisms. What immunoassay can significantly increase informativity of this method?
a. Radioimmunoassay
b. Opsonization
*c. Fluorescence immunoassay
d. Coombs' test
e. Immune-enzyme assay
2716. Sodium citrate is used to preserve donor blood. What should be added to this blood to induce its coagulation?
a. Fibrinogen
b. Vitamin K
*c. Calcium ions
d. Prothrombin
e. Sodium ions
2717. Sodium citrate is used to preserve donor blood. What should be added to this blood to induce its coagulation?
a. Fibrinogen
b. Vitamin K
c. Prothrombin
*d. Calcium ions
e. Sodium ions
2718. Sodium citrate is used to preserve donor blood. What should be added to this blood to induce its coagulation?
a. Prothrombin
b. Fibrinogen
c. Vitamin K
d. Sodium ions
*e. Calcium ions
2719. Sodium thiopental was administered to a patient as a pre-anesthetic, after which the patient developed hypersalivation and laryngospasm. What drug could have prevented these effects, if it had been administered in this case?
*a. Atropine sulfate
b. Piracetam
c. Analgin (Metamizole sodium)
d. Ditylin (Suxamethonium)
e. Adrenaline hydrochloride
2720. Sodium thiopental was administered to a patient as a pre-anesthetic, after which the patient developed hypersalivation and laryngospasm. What drug could have prevented these effects, if it had been administered in this case?
a. Piracetam
b. Adrenaline hydrochloride
c. Ditylin (Suxamethonium)
d. Analgin (Metamizole sodium)
*e. Atropine sulfate
2721. Sodium thiopental was administered to a patient as a pre-anesthetic, after which the patient developed hypersalivation and laryngospasm. What drug could have prevented these effects, if it had been administered in this case?
a. Piracetam
b. Analgin (Metamizole sodium)
c. Adrenaline hydrochloride
*d. Atropine sulfate
e. Ditylin (Suxamethonium)
2722. Some drugs can be classifed as enzymes. Select one such enzyme drug among the listed compounds.
*a. Pepsin
b. Glucokinase
c. Insulin
d. Glucose oxidase
e. Hydrocortisone
2723. Some drugs can be classifed as enzymes. Select one such enzyme drug among the listed compounds.
a. Glucose oxidase
b. Glucokinase
c. Insulin
*d. Pepsin
e. Hydrocortisone
2724. Some drugs can be classifed as enzymes. Select one such enzyme drug among the listed compounds.
a. Hydrocortisone
b. Glucokinase
*c. Pepsin
d. Glucose oxidase
e. Insulin
2725. Some infectious diseases can be prevented by undergoing vaccination. Against what protozoan disease can vaccination be used as a preventive measure?
a. Malaria
b. Toxoplasmosis
c. Urogenital trichomoniasis
*d. Cutaneous leishmaniasis
e. Trypanosomiasis
2726. Some infectious diseases can be prevented by undergoing vaccination. Against what protozoan disease can vaccination be used as a preventive measure?
a. Trypanosomiasis
*b. Cutaneous leishmaniasis
c. Malaria
d. Toxoplasmosis
e. Urogenital trichomoniasis
2727. Some infectious diseases can be prevented by undergoing vaccination. Against what protozoan disease can vaccination be used as a preventive measure?
a. Urogenital trichomoniasis
b. Trypanosomiasis
*c. Cutaneous leishmaniasis
d. Toxoplasmosis
e. Malaria
2728. Some mRNA triplets (UAA, UAG, UGA) code no amino acids and terminate the information readout instead, i.e., they can stop the process of transcription. These triplets are called:
*a. Stop codons
b. Exons
c. Operators
d. Introns
e. Anticodons
2729. Some mRNA triplets (UAA, UAG, UGA) code no amino acids and terminate the information readout instead, i.e., they can stop the process of transcription. These triplets are called:
a. Anticodons
*b. Stop codons
c. Operators
d. Exons
e. Introns
2730. Some mRNA triplets (UAA, UAG, UGA) code no amino acids and terminate the information readout instead, i.e., they can stop the process of transcription. These triplets are called:
a. Anticodons
b. Exons
*c. Stop codons
d. Introns
e. Operators
2731. Some unicellular organisms, i.e. amoebae, feed via phagocytosis. What cells of the human body use this method not as a means of feeding, but as a defensive mechanism against foreign bodies (microorganisms, dust, etc.)?
*a. Leucocytes
b. Epithelial cells
c. Erythrocytes
d. Platelets
e. Myocytes
2732. Some unicellular organisms, i.e. amoebae, feed via phagocytosis. What cells of the human body use this method not as a means of feeding, but as a defensive mechanism against foreign bodies (microorganisms, dust, etc.)?
*a. Leucocytes
b. Epithelial cells
c. Platelets
d. Myocytes
e. Erythrocytes
2733. Some unicellular organisms, i.e. amoebae, feed via phagocytosis. What cells of the human body use this method not as a means of feeding, but as a defensive mechanism against foreign bodies (microorganisms, dust, etc.)?
a. Myocytes
b. Erythrocytes
c. Platelets
*d. Leucocytes
e. Epithelial cells
2734. Specify the concentration of ethyl alcohol that has the most active antimicrobial action in a protein-containing medium:
*a. 70%
b. 60%
c. 15%
d. 40%
e. 96%
2735. Specify the concentration of ethyl alcohol that has the most active antimicrobial action in a protein-containing medium:
a. 40%
b. 60%
*c. 70%
d. 15%
e. 96%
2736. Specify the concentration of ethyl alcohol that has the most active antimicrobial action in a protein-containing medium:
a. 60%
b. 40%
c. 96%
*d. 70%
e. 15%
2737. Spore-containing bacilli were detected in a patient with tetanus. What staining technique was used to detect them?
*a. Ozheshko stain
b. Ziehl-Neelsen stain
c. Morozov stain
d. Gram stain
e. Burri-Gins stain
2738. Spore-containing bacilli were detected in a patient with tetanus. What staining technique was used to detect them?
a. Burri-Gins stain
*b. Ozheshko stain
c. Gram stain
d. Morozov stain
e. Ziehl-Neelsen stain
2739. Spore-containing bacilli were detected in a patient with tetanus. What staining technique was used to detect them?
a. Gram stain
b. Burri-Gins stain
*c. Ozheshko stain
d. Ziehl-Neelsen stain
e. Morozov stain
2740. Synovial fluid is known to reduce friction of the joint surfaces. In rheumatism or arthritis its viscosity reduces because of depolymerization of the following substance:
a. Heparin
*b. Hyaluronic acid
c. Collagen
d. Glycogen
e. Albumin
2741. Synovial fluid is known to reduce friction of the joint surfaces. In rheumatism or arthritis its viscosity reduces because of depolymerization of the following substance:
a. Heparin
b. Collagen
c. Glycogen
d. Albumin
*e. Hyaluronic acid
2742. Synovial fluid is known to reduce friction of the joint surfaces. In rheumatism or arthritis its viscosity reduces because of depolymerization of the following substance:
a. Heparin
b. Glycogen
*c. Hyaluronic acid
d. Albumin
e. Collagen
2743. Ten weeks after a case of jaundice, HBsAg were detected in the patient's blood. What pathology is it characteristic of?
a. Viral hepatitis A
b. Viral hepatitis D
c. Viral hepatitis C
d. Viral hepatitis E
*e. Viral hepatitis B
2744. Ten weeks after a case of jaundice, HBsAg were detected in the patient's blood. What pathology is it characteristic of?
a. Viral hepatitis C
*b. Viral hepatitis B
c. Viral hepatitis E
d. Viral hepatitis A
e. Viral hepatitis D
2745. Ten weeks after a case of jaundice, HBsAg were detected in the patient's blood. What pathology is it characteristic of?
a. Viral hepatitis D
b. Viral hepatitis C
c. Viral hepatitis E
*d. Viral hepatitis B
e. Viral hepatitis A
2746. The autposy of the body of a 4-year-old girl, who was ill for a long time and died of confluent pneumonia, showed that the weight of her thymus was 2 grams. Thymus histology revealed sharp decrease in lymphocyte levels, collapse of the thymic stroma, and a small number of calcified, cystically dilated Hassall's corpuscles. What patological process developed in the thymus?
*a. Thymic atrophy
b. -
c. Thymomegaly
d. Thymic hyperplasia
e. Thymic dysplasia
2747. The autposy of the body of a 4-year-old girl, who was ill for a long time and died of confluent pneumonia, showed that the weight of her thymus was 2 grams. Thymus histology revealed sharp decrease in lymphocyte levels, collapse of the thymic stroma, and a small number of calcified, cystically dilated Hassall's corpuscles. What patological process developed in the thymus?
a. Thymic hyperplasia
b. Thymomegaly
c. -
*d. Thymic atrophy
e. Thymic dysplasia
2748. The autposy of the body of a 4-year-old girl, who was ill for a long time and died of confluent pneumonia, showed that the weight of her thymus was 2 grams. Thymus histology revealed sharp decrease in lymphocyte levels, collapse of the thymic stroma, and a small number of calcified, cystically dilated Hassall's corpuscles. What patological process developed in the thymus?
a. Thymomegaly
b. Thymic hyperplasia
c. Thymic dysplasia
d. -
*e. Thymic atrophy
2749. The cessation of bleeding after a childbirth is associated with the effect of hormones on the uterine structures. What layer of this organ plays the largest role in this process?
a. Perimetrium
b. Endometrium
*c. Middle layer of the myometrium
d. Inner layer of the myometrium
e. Outer layer of the myometrium
2750. The cessation of bleeding after a childbirth is associated with the effect of hormones on the uterine structures. What layer of this organ plays the largest role in this process?
a. Perimetrium
b. Endometrium
c. Outer layer of the myometrium
*d. Middle layer of the myometrium
e. Inner layer of the myometrium
2751. The cessation of bleeding after a childbirth is associated with the effect of hormones on the uterine structures. What layer of this organ plays the largest role in this process?
a. Perimetrium
b. Inner layer of the myometrium
*c. Middle layer of the myometrium
d. Outer layer of the myometrium
e. Endometrium
2752. The cessation of postpartum hemorrhage is associated with the effect of oxytocin on the uterine wall. What uterine membrane responds to this substance?
*a. Myometrium
b. Endometrium
c. Parametrium
d. Submucosa
e. Perimetrium
2753. The cessation of postpartum hemorrhage is associated with the effect of oxytocin on the uterine wall. What uterine membrane responds to this substance?
a. Endometrium
*b. Myometrium
c. Submucosa
d. Perimetrium
e. Parametrium
2754. The cessation of postpartum hemorrhage is associated with the effect of oxytocin on the uterine wall. What uterine membrane responds to this substance?
a. Submucosa
*b. Myometrium
c. Perimetrium
d. Parametrium
e. Endometrium
2755. The condition of teeth depends on fluorine intake by the body, particularly with water. What is the hygienic norm for fluorine content in 1 liter of potable water?
a. 12.0 mg
b. 3.0 mg
c. 6.0 mg
*d. 1.5 mg
e. 9.0 mg
2756. The condition of teeth depends on fluorine intake by the body, particularly with water. What is the hygienic norm for fluorine content in 1 liter of potable water?
a. 3.0 mg
b. 6.0 mg
c. 12.0 mg
d. 9.0 mg
*e. 1.5 mg
2757. The condition of teeth depends on fluorine intake by the body, particularly with water. What is the hygienic norm for fluorine content in 1 liter of potable water?
a. 9.0 mg
b. 12.0 mg
*c. 1.5 mg
d. 6.0 mg
e. 3.0 mg
2758. The costal margin is an important topographic landmark of the human body. It is formed by the cartilage of the following vertebrae:
*a. From 7 to 10
b. From 1 to 12
c. From 1 to 7
d. From 11 to 12
e. Only 12
2759. The costal margin is an important topographic landmark of the human body. It is formed by the cartilage of the following vertebrae:
a. From 11 to 12
*b. From 7 to 10
c. Only 12
d. From 1 to 12
e. From 1 to 7
2760. The costal margin is an important topographic landmark of the human body. It is formed by the cartilage of the following vertebrae:
a. From 11 to 12
b. Only 12
c. From 1 to 12
d. From 1 to 7
*e. From 7 to 10
2761. The course of complete starvation consists of three stages. What is characteristic of the third (terminal) stage of starvation?
a. Activation of lipolysis in adipose tissue
b. Increased formation of ketone bodies in the liver
*c. Increased breakdown of proteins in vital organs
d. Development of non-gaseous acidosis
e. Intensified protein catabolism in muscles and gluconeogenesis in the liver
2762. The course of complete starvation consists of three stages. What is characteristic of the third (terminal) stage of starvation?
a. Development of non-gaseous acidosis
*b. Increased breakdown of proteins in vital organs
c. Increased formation of ketone bodies in the liver
d. Activation of lipolysis in adipose tissue
e. Intensified protein catabolism in muscles and gluconeogenesis in the liver
2763. The course of complete starvation consists of three stages. What is characteristic of the third (terminal) stage of starvation?
a. Development of non-gaseous acidosis
b. Intensified protein catabolism in muscles and gluconeogenesis in the liver
*c. Increased breakdown of proteins in vital organs
d. Increased formation of ketone bodies in the liver
e. Activation of lipolysis in adipose tissue
2764. The dentist examines a pregnant woman. There are 3 round lesions up to 1 cm in diameter on her oral mucosa. The lesions appeared 3 days ago, they have white-gray surface and red margin. The dentist can make the following diagnosis:
a. Gangrenous stomatitis
*b. Aphthous stomatitis
c. Leukoplakia
d. Catarrhal stomatitis
e. Necrotizing ulcerative stomatitis
2765. The dentist examines a pregnant woman. There are 3 round lesions up to 1 cm in diameter on her oral mucosa. The lesions appeared 3 days ago, they have white-gray surface and red margin. The dentist can make the following diagnosis:
a. Gangrenous stomatitis
b. Catarrhal stomatitis
c. Necrotizing ulcerative stomatitis
*d. Aphthous stomatitis
e. Leukoplakia
2766. The dentist examines a pregnant woman. There are 3 round lesions up to 1 cm in diameter on her oral mucosa. The lesions appeared 3 days ago, they have white-gray surface and red margin. The dentist can make the following diagnosis:
a. Leukoplakia
b. Catarrhal stomatitis
c. Gangrenous stomatitis
*d. Aphthous stomatitis
e. Necrotizing ulcerative stomatitis
2767. The doctor observes a disturbed process of lacrimation in the patient due to irritation of one of the branches of the VII pair of cranial nerves. What branch is irritated?
*a. N. petrosus major
b. Chorda tympani
c. N. auricularis posterior
d. R. colli
e. N. stapedius
2768. The doctor observes a disturbed process of lacrimation in the patient due to irritation of one of the branches of the VII pair of cranial nerves. What branch is irritated?
a. Chorda tympani
b. R. colli
c. N. stapedius
d. N. auricularis posterior
*e. N. petrosus major
2769. The doctor observes a disturbed process of lacrimation in the patient due to irritation of one of the branches of the VII pair of cranial nerves. What branch is irritated?
a. N. stapedius
b. N. auricularis posterior
c. Chorda tympani
*d. N. petrosus major
e. R. colli
2770. The doctor stated the absence of respiration and cardiac activity in a traffic accident victim. This condition lasts for 1 minute already. This clinical presentation corresponds with the following terminal state:
*a. Clinical death
b. Traumatic shock, erectile phase
c. Preagony
d. Traumatic shock, torpid phase
e. Agony
2771. The doctor stated the absence of respiration and cardiac activity in a traffic accident victim. This condition lasts for 1 minute already. This clinical presentation corresponds with the following terminal state:
a. Agony
*b. Clinical death
c. Traumatic shock, torpid phase
d. Traumatic shock, erectile phase
e. Preagony
2772. The doctor stated the absence of respiration and cardiac activity in a traffic accident victim. This condition lasts for 1 minute already. This clinical presentation corresponds with the following terminal state:
a. Traumatic shock, erectile phase
b. Traumatic shock, torpid phase
*c. Clinical death
d. Preagony
e. Agony
2773. The height of a person is controlled by several non-allelic dominant genes. If the number of this genes is increased, the height of a person increases as well. What type of interaction occurs between these genes?
a. Complementarity
b. Codominance
c. Pleiotropy
d. Epistasis
*e. Polymery
2774. The height of a person is controlled by several non-allelic dominant genes. If the number of this genes is increased, the height of a person increases as well. What type of interaction occurs between these genes?
a. Epistasis
*b. Polymery
c. Codominance
d. Complementarity
e. Pleiotropy
2775. The height of a person is controlled by several non-allelic dominant genes. If the number of this genes is increased, the height of a person increases as well. What type of interaction occurs between these genes?
a. Epistasis
b. Codominance
c. Complementarity
*d. Polymery
e. Pleiotropy
2776. The investigation of the imprints obtained from the epidermal ridges on the fingers (dactyloscopy) is used by criminologists to identify people, as well as for diagnostics of a number of genetic anomalies, e.g., Down syndrome. What skin layer determines the uniqueness of the imprints?
a. Basal layer
*b. Papillary layer
c. Translucent layer
d. Cornified layer
e. Reticular layer
2777. The investigation of the imprints obtained from the epidermal ridges on the fingers (dactyloscopy) is used by criminologists to identify people, as well as for diagnostics of a number of genetic anomalies, e.g., Down syndrome. What skin layer determines the uniqueness of the imprints?
a. Reticular layer
*b. Papillary layer
c. Basal layer
d. Cornified layer
e. Translucent layer
2778. The investigation of the imprints obtained from the epidermal ridges on the fingers (dactyloscopy) is used by criminologists to identify people, as well as for diagnostics of a number of genetic anomalies, e.g., Down syndrome. What skin layer determines the uniqueness of the imprints?
a. Reticular layer
*b. Papillary layer
c. Cornified layer
d. Basal layer
e. Translucent layer
2779. The leading role in the process of dentin and cementum mineralization belongs to osteocalcin protein that has a high ability to bind calcium ions due to the presence of residues of a certain modified amino acid in its polypeptide chain. Name this amino acid:
*a. gamma-carboxyglutamic amino acid
b. beta-alanine
c. beta-carboxyaspartic amino acid
d. gamma-aminobutyric amino acid
e. beta-aminopropionic amino acid
2780. The leading role in the process of dentin and cementum mineralization belongs to osteocalcin protein that has a high ability to bind calcium ions due to the presence of residues of a certain modified amino acid in its polypeptide chain. Name this amino acid:
a. beta-alanine
b. beta-aminopropionic amino acid
c. beta-carboxyaspartic amino acid
d. gamma-aminobutyric amino acid
*e. gamma-carboxyglutamic amino acid
2781. The leading role in the process of dentin and cementum mineralization belongs to osteocalcin protein that has a high ability to bind calcium ions due to the presence of residues of a certain modified amino acid in its polypeptide chain. Name this amino acid:
a. gamma-aminobutyric amino acid
b. beta-carboxyaspartic amino acid
*c. gamma-carboxyglutamic amino acid
d. beta-alanine
e. beta-aminopropionic amino acid
2782. The levels of Ca^2+ ions in the blood decreased as a result of a special diet, which will in turn cause increased secretion of a certain hormone. Name this hormone.
*a. Parathormone
b. Vasopressin
c. Thyroxine
d. Thyrocalcitonin
e. Somatotropin
2783. The levels of Ca^2+ ions in the blood decreased as a result of a special diet, which will in turn cause increased secretion of a certain hormone. Name this hormone.
a. Somatotropin
*b. Parathormone
c. Vasopressin
d. Thyrocalcitonin
e. Thyroxine
2784. The levels of Ca^2+ ions in the blood decreased as a result of a special diet, which will in turn cause increased secretion of a certain hormone. Name this hormone.
a. Vasopressin
b. Thyrocalcitonin
c. Somatotropin
d. Thyroxine
*e. Parathormone
2785. The microslide of a parenchymatous organ shows hexagonal lobules with blurry margins and a vein in the center of each lobule. In the interlobular connective tissue there are triads, consisting of an artery, a vein, and an excretory duct. What organ is it?
a. Pancreas
b. Thyroid
c. Spleen
d. Thymus
*e. Liver
2786. The microslide of a parenchymatous organ shows hexagonal lobules with blurry margins and a vein in the center of each lobule. In the interlobular connective tissue there are triads, consisting of an artery, a vein, and an excretory duct. What organ is it?
a. Spleen
b. Thyroid
c. Pancreas
*d. Liver
e. Thymus
2787. The microslide of a parenchymatous organ shows hexagonal lobules with blurry margins and a vein in the center of each lobule. In the interlobular connective tissue there are triads, consisting of an artery, a vein, and an excretory duct. What organ is it?
a. Thymus
b. Thyroid
c. Spleen
*d. Liver
e. Pancreas
2788. The molecules of mature mRNA in a cell are the carriers of genetic information about the sequence, in which certain amino acids must attach to each other. What is coded within the mRNA molecules?
a. Primary structure of lipids
b. Primary structure of carbohydrates
c. Primary structure of polynucleotides
*d. Primary structure of a protein
e. Secondary structure of carbohydrates
2789. The molecules of mature mRNA in a cell are the carriers of genetic information about the sequence, in which certain amino acids must attach to each other. What is coded within the mRNA molecules?
a. Primary structure of lipids
b. Secondary structure of carbohydrates
c. Primary structure of polynucleotides
*d. Primary structure of a protein
e. Primary structure of carbohydrates
2790. The molecules of mature mRNA in a cell are the carriers of genetic information about the sequence, in which certain amino acids must attach to each other. What is coded within the mRNA molecules?
a. Primary structure of polynucleotides
b. Secondary structure of carbohydrates
*c. Primary structure of a protein
d. Primary structure of carbohydrates
e. Primary structure of lipids
2791. The most common cause of incomplete lipid digestion in the digestive tract and an increase in the levels of neutral fats in the feces is a deficiency of a certain enzyme. Name this enzyme:
*a. Pancreatic lipase
b. Phospholipase
c. Gastric lipase
d. Enterokinase
e. Intestinal lipase
2792. The most common cause of incomplete lipid digestion in the digestive tract and an increase in the levels of neutral fats in the feces is a deficiency of a certain enzyme. Name this enzyme:
a. Gastric lipase
b. Enterokinase
*c. Pancreatic lipase
d. Intestinal lipase
e. Phospholipase
2793. The most common cause of incomplete lipid digestion in the digestive tract and an increase in the levels of neutral fats in the feces is a deficiency of a certain enzyme. Name this enzyme:
a. Phospholipase
b. Intestinal lipase
c. Enterokinase
d. Gastric lipase
*e. Pancreatic lipase
2794. The patient exhausted by starvation presents with intensification of the following process in the liver and kidneys:
*a. Gluconeogenesis
b. Bilirubin synthesis
c. Urea synthesis
d. Hippuric acid synthesis
e. Uric acid synthesis
2795. The patient exhausted by starvation presents with intensification of the following process in the liver and kidneys:
a. Bilirubin synthesis
b. Hippuric acid synthesis
c. Uric acid synthesis
*d. Gluconeogenesis
e. Urea synthesis
2796. The patient exhausted by starvation presents with intensification of the following process in the liver and kidneys:
a. Uric acid synthesis
b. Bilirubin synthesis
c. Urea synthesis
d. Hippuric acid synthesis
*e. Gluconeogenesis
2797. The patient is in the state of cardiogenic shock, he needs to be given a non-glycoside cardiotonic drug. What will be the drug of choice in this case?
*a. Dobutamine
b. Cordiamin (Nikethamide)
c. Ethimizol
d. Amrinone
e. Caffeine
2798. The patient is in the state of cardiogenic shock, he needs to be given a non-glycoside cardiotonic drug. What will be the drug of choice in this case?
a. Amrinone
b. Caffeine
c. Ethimizol
d. Cordiamin (Nikethamide)
*e. Dobutamine
2799. The patient is in the state of cardiogenic shock, he needs to be given a non-glycoside cardiotonic drug. What will be the drug of choice in this case?
a. Ethimizol
*b. Dobutamine
c. Amrinone
d. Caffeine
e. Cordiamin (Nikethamide)
2800. The patient was prescribed Vicasol (Menadione) several days before the elective surgery for peptic ulcer disease of the stomach. What is the mechanism of action of this drug?
a. Binds free calcium ions, removing calcium from coagulation reaction
*b. Increases blood coagulability via intensified prothrombin synthesis
c. Suppresses platelet aggregation
d. Decreases vascular permeability
e. Suppresses fibrinolysis
2801. The patient was prescribed Vicasol (Menadione) several days before the elective surgery for peptic ulcer disease of the stomach. What is the mechanism of action of this drug?
a. Decreases vascular permeability
b. Suppresses fibrinolysis
c. Suppresses platelet aggregation
*d. Increases blood coagulability via intensified prothrombin synthesis
e. Binds free calcium ions, removing calcium from coagulation reaction
2802. The patient was prescribed Vicasol (Menadione) several days before the elective surgery for peptic ulcer disease of the stomach. What is the mechanism of action of this drug?
a. Suppresses fibrinolysis
*b. Increases blood coagulability via intensified prothrombin synthesis
c. Suppresses platelet aggregation
d. Decreases vascular permeability
e. Binds free calcium ions, removing calcium from coagulation reaction
2803. The patient's ECG shows a shortened R-R interval. How will the cardiac activity change as the result?
a. Force of cardiac contractions will decrease
*b. Frequency of cardiac contractions will increase
c. Force of cardiac contractions will increase
d. Frequency and force of cardiac contractions will decrease
e. Frequency of cardiac contractions will decrease
2804. The patient's ECG shows a shortened R-R interval. How will the cardiac activity change as the result?
a. Force of cardiac contractions will decrease
b. Force of cardiac contractions will increase
*c. Frequency of cardiac contractions will increase
d. Frequency of cardiac contractions will decrease
e. Frequency and force of cardiac contractions will decrease
2805. The patient's ECG shows a shortened R-R interval. How will the cardiac activity change as the result?
a. Force of cardiac contractions will decrease
b. Force of cardiac contractions will increase
c. Frequency and force of cardiac contractions will decrease
d. Frequency of cardiac contractions will decrease
*e. Frequency of cardiac contractions will increase
2806. The patient's EEG shows delta and theta rhythms, which indicates that the patient is in a state of:
*a. Slow-wave sleep
b. Rest with eyes open
c. Active wakefulness
d. Rest with eyes closed
e. Rapid eye movement sleep
2807. The patient's EEG shows delta and theta rhythms, which indicates that the patient is in a state of:
a. Active wakefulness
*b. Slow-wave sleep
c. Rest with eyes closed
d. Rapid eye movement sleep
e. Rest with eyes open
2808. The patient's EEG shows delta and theta rhythms, which indicates that the patient is in a state of:
a. Active wakefulness
b. Rest with eyes closed
*c. Slow-wave sleep
d. Rapid eye movement sleep
e. Rest with eyes open
2809. The patient's blood group is being determined using monoclonal test reagents. Agglutination reaction is positive with anti-A and anti-B reagents and negative with anti-D reagents. Name the blood group of this patient:
*a.  (V) Rh (-)
b. 0 (I) Rh (+)
c.  () Rh (+)
d.  (V) Rh (+)
e. B (III) Rh (-)
2810. The patient's blood group is being determined using monoclonal test reagents. Agglutination reaction is positive with anti-A and anti-B reagents and negative with anti-D reagents. Name the blood group of this patient:
a. 0 (I) Rh (+)
*b.  (V) Rh (-)
c.  () Rh (+)
d.  (V) Rh (+)
e. B (III) Rh (-)
2811. The patient's blood group is being determined using monoclonal test reagents. Agglutination reaction is positive with anti-A and anti-B reagents and negative with anti-D reagents. Name the blood group of this patient:
a.  (V) Rh (+)
b.  () Rh (+)
c. 0 (I) Rh (+)
*d.  (V) Rh (-)
e. B (III) Rh (-)
2812. The patient's blood pressure was measured by auscultation of the vascular sounds. What is the name of the researcher who proposed this method of blood pressure measuring?
*a. Korotkov
b. Ludwig
c. Goltz
d. Riva-Rocci
e. Siechenov
2813. The patient's blood pressure was measured by auscultation of the vascular sounds. What is the name of the researcher who proposed this method of blood pressure measuring?
*a. Korotkov
b. Siechenov
c. Ludwig
d. Goltz
e. Riva-Rocci
2814. The patient's blood pressure was measured by auscultation of the vascular sounds. What is the name of the researcher who proposed this method of blood pressure measuring?
*a. Korotkov
b. Siechenov
c. Riva-Rocci
d. Ludwig
e. Goltz
2815. The patient's caries was complicated by pulpitis accompanied by unbearable pain. What is the main cause of such pain in cases of pulp inflammation?
a. Primary alteration
b. Ischemia
c. Leukocyte emigration
*d. Exudation
e. Proliferation
2816. The patient's caries was complicated by pulpitis accompanied by unbearable pain. What is the main cause of such pain in cases of pulp inflammation?
a. Primary alteration
b. Leukocyte emigration
*c. Exudation
d. Ischemia
e. Proliferation
2817. The patient's caries was complicated by pulpitis accompanied by unbearable pain. What is the main cause of such pain in cases of pulp inflammation?
a. Proliferation
b. Ischemia
c. Primary alteration
*d. Exudation
e. Leukocyte emigration
2818. The patient's ciliary body is damaged. What ocular apparatus is likely to be dysfunctional in this case?
*a. Accommodation apparatus
b. Protective apparatus
c. Trophic apparatus
d. Photosensitive apparatus
e. Light-conducting apparatus
2819. The patient's ciliary body is damaged. What ocular apparatus is likely to be dysfunctional in this case?
a. Trophic apparatus
*b. Accommodation apparatus
c. Protective apparatus
d. Photosensitive apparatus
e. Light-conducting apparatus
2820. The patient's ciliary body is damaged. What ocular apparatus is likely to be dysfunctional in this case?
a. Trophic apparatus
b. Protective apparatus
c. Photosensitive apparatus
*d. Accommodation apparatus
e. Light-conducting apparatus
2821. The patient's joints are enlarged and painful. The patient's blood urate levels are high. Name this pathology:
a. Caries
b. Pellagra
c. Scurvy
*d. Gout
e. Rickets
2822. The patient's joints are enlarged and painful. The patient's blood urate levels are high. Name this pathology:
a. Caries
b. Scurvy
*c. Gout
d. Pellagra
e. Rickets
2823. The patient's joints are enlarged and painful. The patient's blood urate levels are high. Name this pathology:
a. Rickets
b. Caries
*c. Gout
d. Pellagra
e. Scurvy
2824. The patient's masticatory muscles are paralyzed on the left. These muscles are innervated by the branches of the:
a. Maxillary nerve
b. Supraorbital nerve and infratrochlear nerve
c. Zygomatic nerve
*d. Mandibular nerve
e. Nasociliary nerve
2825. The patient's masticatory muscles are paralyzed on the left. These muscles are innervated by the branches of the:
a. Nasociliary nerve
b. Supraorbital nerve and infratrochlear nerve
c. Zygomatic nerve
*d. Mandibular nerve
e. Maxillary nerve
2826. The patient's masticatory muscles are paralyzed on the left. These muscles are innervated by the branches of the:
a. Supraorbital nerve and infratrochlear nerve
b. Zygomatic nerve
c. Maxillary nerve
d. Nasociliary nerve
*e. Mandibular nerve
2827. The patient's right palpebral fissure is markedly larger than the left. What mimic muscle is functionally disturbed in this case?
a. M. corrugator supercilli
b. M. zygomaticus major
c. M. occipitofrontalis (venter frontalis)
d. M. procerus
*e. M. orbicularis oculi
2828. The patient's right palpebral fissure is markedly larger than the left. What mimic muscle is functionally disturbed in this case?
a. M. procerus
b. M. zygomaticus major
c. M. corrugator supercilli
d. M. occipitofrontalis (venter frontalis)
*e. M. orbicularis oculi
2829. The patient's right palpebral fissure is markedly larger than the left. What mimic muscle is functionally disturbed in this case?
a. M. zygomaticus major
*b. M. orbicularis oculi
c. M. corrugator supercilli
d. M. procerus
e. M. occipitofrontalis (venter frontalis)
2830. The patient's salivary porphyrin concentration allowed diagnosisng him with porphyria. This disease leads to disturbed synthesis of the following compound:
a. Glycogen
b. Creatine
c. Uric acid
d. Phospholipids
*e. Heme
2831. The patient's salivary porphyrin concentration allowed diagnosisng him with porphyria. This disease leads to disturbed synthesis of the following compound:
a. Glycogen
b. Phospholipids
c. Uric acid
*d. Heme
e. Creatine
2832. The patient's salivary porphyrin concentration allowed diagnosisng him with porphyria. This disease leads to disturbed synthesis of the following compound:
a. Uric acid
b. Glycogen
c. Creatine
d. Phospholipids
*e. Heme
2833. The patient, who for a long time has been keeping to an unbalanced low-protein diet, developed fatty liver infiltration. Name the substance, absence of which in the diet can lead to this condition:
a. Arachidonic acid
b. Biotin
*c. Methionine
d. Cholesterol
e. Alanine
2834. The patient, who for a long time has been keeping to an unbalanced low-protein diet, developed fatty liver infiltration. Name the substance, absence of which in the diet can lead to this condition:
a. Arachidonic acid
b. Cholesterol
c. Biotin
d. Alanine
*e. Methionine
2835. The patient, who for a long time has been keeping to an unbalanced low-protein diet, developed fatty liver infiltration. Name the substance, absence of which in the diet can lead to this condition:
a. Cholesterol
b. Biotin
*c. Methionine
d. Alanine
e. Arachidonic acid
2836. The pediatrician examines a one-year-old child. The child has 4 teeth in the oral cavity. How many milk teeth should the child have at this age?
*a. 8
b. 14
c. 20
d. 10
e. 12
2837. The pediatrician examines a one-year-old child. The child has 4 teeth in the oral cavity. How many milk teeth should the child have at this age?
a. 14
*b. 8
c. 10
d. 20
e. 12
2838. The pediatrician examines a one-year-old child. The child has 4 teeth in the oral cavity. How many milk teeth should the child have at this age?
a. 14
b. 10
*c. 8
d. 20
e. 12
2839. The physiological properties of human cardiac muscle include all of the listed below except:
a. Contractility
b. Conductivity
c. Automaticity
d. Excitability
*e. Elasticity
2840. The physiological properties of human cardiac muscle include all of the listed below except:
a. Excitability
b. Contractility
c. Automaticity
*d. Elasticity
e. Conductivity
2841. The presence of an allosteric center is a structural feature of regulatory enzymes. What is its role?
*a. Binds the regulatory effector
b. Binds the coenzyme
c. Promotes the coenzyme dissociation
d. Binds the substrate
e. Changes the structure of the substrate
2842. The presence of an allosteric center is a structural feature of regulatory enzymes. What is its role?
a. Binds the substrate
b. Binds the coenzyme
*c. Binds the regulatory effector
d. Changes the structure of the substrate
e. Promotes the coenzyme dissociation
2843. The presence of an allosteric center is a structural feature of regulatory enzymes. What is its role?
a. Binds the substrate
b. Promotes the coenzyme dissociation
*c. Binds the regulatory effector
d. Binds the coenzyme
e. Changes the structure of the substrate
2844. The process of aging in humans is associated with decreased synthesis and secretion of pancreatic juice and its lower trypsin content. It results in disturbed breakdown of:
*a. Proteins
b. Lipids
c. Phospholipids
d. Polysaccharides
e. Nucleic acids
2845. The process of aging in humans is associated with decreased synthesis and secretion of pancreatic juice and its lower trypsin content. It results in disturbed breakdown of:
*a. Proteins
b. Phospholipids
c. Lipids
d. Nucleic acids
e. Polysaccharides
2846. The process of aging in humans is associated with decreased synthesis and secretion of pancreatic juice and its lower trypsin content. It results in disturbed breakdown of:
a. Polysaccharides
b. Phospholipids
c. Lipids
d. Nucleic acids
*e. Proteins
2847. The sequence of DNA triplets determines the arrangement of amino acids in a protein molecule. This characteristic of the genetic code is called:
a. Non-overlapping
*b. Colinearity
c. Redundancy
d. Universality
e. Triplet code
2848. The sequence of DNA triplets determines the arrangement of amino acids in a protein molecule. This characteristic of the genetic code is called:
a. Non-overlapping
b. Redundancy
c. Triplet code
*d. Colinearity
e. Universality
2849. The sequence of DNA triplets determines the arrangement of amino acids in a protein molecule. This characteristic of the genetic code is called:
a. Universality
b. Triplet code
c. Non-overlapping
d. Redundancy
*e. Colinearity
2850. The sequence of triplets in DNA determines the sequence of amino acids in a protein molecule. What characteristic of the genetic code is it?
a. Triplet structure
b. Non-overlapping
*c. Collinearity
d. Universality
e. Degeneracy
2851. The sequence of triplets in DNA determines the sequence of amino acids in a protein molecule. What characteristic of the genetic code is it?
a. Triplet structure
b. Universality
c. Non-overlapping
*d. Collinearity
e. Degeneracy
2852. The sequence of triplets in DNA determines the sequence of amino acids in a protein molecule. What characteristic of the genetic code is it?
a. Universality
b. Degeneracy
c. Triplet structure
*d. Collinearity
e. Non-overlapping
2853. The substances are excreted from the cell, when membrane structure of the Golgi apparatus connects to the cell membrane. The content of this structure is then expelled from the cell. This process is called:
a. Endocytosis
b. Facilitated diffusion
c. Osmosis
*d. Exocytosis
e. -
2854. The substances are excreted from the cell, when membrane structure of the Golgi apparatus connects to the cell membrane. The content of this structure is then expelled from the cell. This process is called:
a. Endocytosis
b. Osmosis
*c. Exocytosis
d. -
e. Facilitated diffusion
2855. The substances are excreted from the cell, when membrane structure of the Golgi apparatus connects to the cell membrane. The content of this structure is then expelled from the cell. This process is called:
a. Facilitated diffusion
b. -
c. Endocytosis
d. Osmosis
*e. Exocytosis
2856. The terminal segments of apocrine sweat glands contain myoepithelial cells. What is the function of these cells?
a. Regenerative function
b. Secretory function
c. Protective function
d. Supporting function
*e. Contractile function
2857. The terminal segments of apocrine sweat glands contain myoepithelial cells. What is the function of these cells?
a. Secretory function
b. Protective function
c. Regenerative function
*d. Contractile function
e. Supporting function
2858. The terminal segments of apocrine sweat glands contain myoepithelial cells. What is the function of these cells?
a. Supporting function
b. Secretory function
*c. Contractile function
d. Regenerative function
e. Protective function
2859. The third heart sound can be detected via phonocardiogram only in adult non-asthenic patients. It occurs during the following phase of a cardiac cycle:
a. Asynchronous contraction
b. Isovolumetric relaxation
c. Reduced filling
*d. Rapid filling
e. Rapid ejection
2860. The third heart sound can be detected via phonocardiogram only in adult non-asthenic patients. It occurs during the following phase of a cardiac cycle:
a. Rapid ejection
b. Reduced filling
c. Isovolumetric relaxation
*d. Rapid filling
e. Asynchronous contraction
2861. The third heart sound can be detected via phonocardiogram only in adult non-asthenic patients. It occurs during the following phase of a cardiac cycle:
a. Reduced filling
b. Asynchronous contraction
c. Isovolumetric relaxation
d. Rapid ejection
*e. Rapid filling
2862. The toxicology department received a patient with signs of acute mercury compound poisoning. What drug should be prescribed as an antidote?
a. Barrol (Rabeprazole)
b. Neuromidin (Ipidacrine)
c. Plantaglucid (Plantaginis majoris foliorum extract)
d. Triphthazin (Trifluoperazine)
*e. Unithiol (Dimercaptopropansulfonate)
2863. The toxicology department received a patient with signs of acute mercury compound poisoning. What drug should be prescribed as an antidote?
a. Neuromidin (Ipidacrine)
*b. Unithiol (Dimercaptopropansulfonate)
c. Barrol (Rabeprazole)
d. Plantaglucid (Plantaginis majoris foliorum extract)
e. Triphthazin (Trifluoperazine)
2864. The toxicology department received a patient with signs of acute mercury compound poisoning. What drug should be prescribed as an antidote?
a. Triphthazin (Trifluoperazine)
b. Plantaglucid (Plantaginis majoris foliorum extract)
c. Barrol (Rabeprazole)
*d. Unithiol (Dimercaptopropansulfonate)
e. Neuromidin (Ipidacrine)
2865. The workers of a nuclear power plant undergo regular medical check-ups,  during which primarily the system that is the most sensitive to ionizing radiation is examined. Name this system:
*a. Hematopoietic system
b. Nervous system
c. Epithelial tissues
d. Skeletal system
e. Muscular system
2866. The workers of a nuclear power plant undergo regular medical check-ups,  during which primarily the system that is the most sensitive to ionizing radiation is examined. Name this system:
a. Epithelial tissues
b. Skeletal system
*c. Hematopoietic system
d. Nervous system
e. Muscular system
2867. The workers of a nuclear power plant undergo regular medical check-ups,  during which primarily the system that is the most sensitive to ionizing radiation is examined. Name this system:
a. Nervous system
*b. Hematopoietic system
c. Skeletal system
d. Muscular system
e. Epithelial tissues
2868. There are several ways of ammonia neutralization in the body, with some organs having their own specific ways. What way of ammonia neutralization is characteristic of brain cells?
*a. Glutamine formation
b. Asparagine formation
c. Creatine formation
d. NH4+ formation
e. Urea formation
2869. There are several ways of ammonia neutralization in the body, with some organs having their own specific ways. What way of ammonia neutralization is characteristic of brain cells?
*a. Glutamine formation
b. Creatine formation
c. Asparagine formation
d. Urea formation
e. NH4+ formation
2870. There are several ways of ammonia neutralization in the body, with some organs having their own specific ways. What way of ammonia neutralization is characteristic of brain cells?
a. Urea formation
b. Creatine formation
*c. Glutamine formation
d. Asparagine formation
e. NH4+ formation
2871. Thirty minutes after drinking mango juice, a child suddenly developed a limited swelling on the soft palate that hindered swallowing and later breathing. The mucosa in the area of the swelling is hyperemic and painless. Blood test detected eosinophilia. The child's body temperature is normal. From the family history it is known that the child's older sister had bronchial asthma attacks. What type of edema did this child most likely develop?
a. Cardiac
*b. Allergic
c. Hepatic
d. Inflammatory
e. Alimentary
2872. Thirty minutes after drinking mango juice, a child suddenly developed a limited swelling on the soft palate that hindered swallowing and later breathing. The mucosa in the area of the swelling is hyperemic and painless. Blood test detected eosinophilia. The child's body temperature is normal. From the family history it is known that the child's older sister had bronchial asthma attacks. What type of edema did this child most likely develop?
a. Cardiac
b. Inflammatory
c. Hepatic
d. Alimentary
*e. Allergic
2873. Thirty minutes after drinking mango juice, a child suddenly developed a limited swelling on the soft palate that hindered swallowing and later breathing. The mucosa in the area of the swelling is hyperemic and painless. Blood test detected eosinophilia. The child's body temperature is normal. From the family history it is known that the child's older sister had bronchial asthma attacks. What type of edema did this child most likely develop?
a. Inflammatory
b. Cardiac
c. Hepatic
*d. Allergic
e. Alimentary
2874. This extremely dangerous disease can be transmitted from a sick animal to a human via a flea bite. It exhibits characteristic lymphogenic spread of the causative agent with hemorrhagic inflammation of the regional lymph nodes. Name this disease:
*a. Plague
b. Anthrax
c. Cholera
d. Tuberculosis
e. Tularemia
2875. This extremely dangerous disease can be transmitted from a sick animal to a human via a flea bite. It exhibits characteristic lymphogenic spread of the causative agent with hemorrhagic inflammation of the regional lymph nodes. Name this disease:
a. Tuberculosis
b. Tularemia
*c. Plague
d. Anthrax
e. Cholera
2876. This extremely dangerous disease can be transmitted from a sick animal to a human via a flea bite. It exhibits characteristic lymphogenic spread of the causative agent with hemorrhagic inflammation of the regional lymph nodes. Name this disease:
a. Tularemia
b. Tuberculosis
c. Anthrax
*d. Plague
e. Cholera
2877. Three days after the filling of the first right premolar, the patient developed pain under the right eye and persistent nasal congestion accompanied by the fever of 38^oC and discharge of purulent mucus from the right nasal passage. What mistake was likely made by the doctor in this case?
*a. Perforation of the right maxillary sinus
b. Perforation of the sphenoid sinus
c. Perforation of the infraorbital canal
d. Fracture of the interalveolar septum
e. Perforation of the right wall of the nasal cavity
2878. Three days after the filling of the first right premolar, the patient developed pain under the right eye and persistent nasal congestion accompanied by the fever of 38^oC and discharge of purulent mucus from the right nasal passage. What mistake was likely made by the doctor in this case?
*a. Perforation of the right maxillary sinus
b. Perforation of the sphenoid sinus
c. Perforation of the right wall of the nasal cavity
d. Fracture of the interalveolar septum
e. Perforation of the infraorbital canal
2879. Three days after the filling of the first right premolar, the patient developed pain under the right eye and persistent nasal congestion accompanied by the fever of 38^oC and discharge of purulent mucus from the right nasal passage. What mistake was likely made by the doctor in this case?
a. Perforation of the right wall of the nasal cavity
b. Perforation of the sphenoid sinus
c. Fracture of the interalveolar septum
d. Perforation of the infraorbital canal
*e. Perforation of the right maxillary sinus
2880. To clarify the diagnosis of a 15-year-old patient, it is necessary to perform a sialography of the parotid gland. Where is the opening, through which a radiocontrast agent will be introduced in this case?
*a. On the cheek, opposite of the 2nd upper molar
b. On the cheek, opposite of the 2nd lower molar
c. On the cheek, opposite of the 2nd upper premolar
d. -
e. On the cheek, opposite of the 2nd lower premolar
2881. To clarify the diagnosis of a 15-year-old patient, it is necessary to perform a sialography of the parotid gland. Where is the opening, through which a radiocontrast agent will be introduced in this case?
a. -
b. On the cheek, opposite of the 2nd lower premolar
c. On the cheek, opposite of the 2nd lower molar
d. On the cheek, opposite of the 2nd upper premolar
*e. On the cheek, opposite of the 2nd upper molar
2882. To clarify the diagnosis of a 15-year-old patient, it is necessary to perform a sialography of the parotid gland. Where is the opening, through which a radiocontrast agent will be introduced in this case?
a. On the cheek, opposite of the 2nd upper premolar
*b. On the cheek, opposite of the 2nd upper molar
c. -
d. On the cheek, opposite of the 2nd lower molar
e. On the cheek, opposite of the 2nd lower premolar
2883. To determine functional state of the patient's liver, the analysis of animal indican excreted with urine was conducted. This substance is produced in the process of detoxification of putrefaction products of a certain amino acid, which takes place in the large intestine. Name this amino acid:
a. Cysteine
*b. Tryptophan
c. Valine
d. Serine
e. Glycine
2884. To determine functional state of the patient's liver, the analysis of animal indican excreted with urine was conducted. This substance is produced in the process of detoxification of putrefaction products of a certain amino acid, which takes place in the large intestine. Name this amino acid:
a. Glycine
b. Valine
c. Serine
d. Cysteine
*e. Tryptophan
2885. To examine the fundus of the eye, a mydriatic was instilled into the patient's conjunctival sac. This mydriatic does not interfere with the process of eye accommodation. Name this drug.
a. Atropine
b. Platyphylline
c. Tropicamide
*d. Mesaton (Phenylephrine)
e. Homatropine
2886. To examine the fundus of the eye, a mydriatic was instilled into the patient's conjunctival sac. This mydriatic does not interfere with the process of eye accommodation. Name this drug.
a. Atropine
b. Tropicamide
c. Homatropine
d. Platyphylline
*e. Mesaton (Phenylephrine)
2887. To examine the fundus of the eye, a mydriatic was instilled into the patient's conjunctival sac. This mydriatic does not interfere with the process of eye accommodation. Name this drug.
a. Platyphylline
*b. Mesaton (Phenylephrine)
c. Tropicamide
d. Atropine
e. Homatropine
2888. To facilitate teeth mineralization in the course of caries treatment, certain substances are used. These substances are the source from which minerals are supplied to the hard dental tissues. Name these substances:
*a. Calcium glycerophosphate
b. Sodium chloride
c. Magnesium sulfate
d. Potassium sulfate
e. Copper sulfate
2889. To facilitate teeth mineralization in the course of caries treatment, certain substances are used. These substances are the source from which minerals are supplied to the hard dental tissues. Name these substances:
a. Magnesium sulfate
b. Potassium sulfate
c. Sodium chloride
*d. Calcium glycerophosphate
e. Copper sulfate
2890. To facilitate teeth mineralization in the course of caries treatment, certain substances are used. These substances are the source from which minerals are supplied to the hard dental tissues. Name these substances:
a. Sodium chloride
b. Copper sulfate
*c. Calcium glycerophosphate
d. Potassium sulfate
e. Magnesium sulfate
2891. To improve digestion of fatty food, the patient was prescribed a bile-containing preparation. What components of this preparation take part in emulsification of fats?
a. Bilirubin glucuronides
*b. Bile acids
c. Higher fatty acids
d. Diglycerides
e. Cholesterol and its ethers
2892. To improve digestion of fatty food, the patient was prescribed a bile-containing preparation. What components of this preparation take part in emulsification of fats?
a. Bilirubin glucuronides
b. Higher fatty acids
*c. Bile acids
d. Diglycerides
e. Cholesterol and its ethers
2893. To improve digestion of fatty food, the patient was prescribed a bile-containing preparation. What components of this preparation take part in emulsification of fats?
a. Cholesterol and its ethers
b. Bilirubin glucuronides
c. Higher fatty acids
*d. Bile acids
e. Diglycerides
2894. To improve tooth mineralization, dentists prescribe Ca^2+ preparations. This substance \textbfHAS NO EFFECT on the following processes in an organism:
*a. Oncotic pressure generation
b. Hemostasis
c. Development of myocardial depolarization
d. Muscle contraction
e. Synaptic transmission of excitation
2895. To improve tooth mineralization, dentists prescribe Ca^2+ preparations. This substance \textbfHAS NO EFFECT on the following processes in an organism:
a. Hemostasis
*b. Oncotic pressure generation
c. Muscle contraction
d. Synaptic transmission of excitation
e. Development of myocardial depolarization
2896. To improve tooth mineralization, dentists prescribe Ca^2+ preparations. This substance \textbfHAS NO EFFECT on the following processes in an organism:
a. Synaptic transmission of excitation
*b. Oncotic pressure generation
c. Muscle contraction
d. Hemostasis
e. Development of myocardial depolarization
2897. To model a stomach ulcer, atophan (cinchophen) had been administered into the gastric arteries of a test animal, which caused their sclerosing. What mechanism of gastric mucosa damage is leading in this experiment?
a. Mechanical
*b. Hypoxic
c. Disregulatory
d. Neurodystrophic
e. Neurohumoral
2898. To model a stomach ulcer, atophan (cinchophen) had been administered into the gastric arteries of a test animal, which caused their sclerosing. What mechanism of gastric mucosa damage is leading in this experiment?
a. Neurodystrophic
*b. Hypoxic
c. Disregulatory
d. Mechanical
e. Neurohumoral
2899. To model a stomach ulcer, atophan (cinchophen) had been administered into the gastric arteries of a test animal, which caused their sclerosing. What mechanism of gastric mucosa damage is leading in this experiment?
a. Neurohumoral
b. Neurodystrophic
c. Mechanical
d. Disregulatory
*e. Hypoxic
2900. To prevent an increase in hepatitis B morbidity in the city hospitals, it is necessary to vaccinate the medical personnel. What should be used for immunization in this case?
*a. Recombinant vaccine
b. Arbidol (Umifenovir)
c. Live attenuated vaccine
d. Interferon
e. Inactivated vaccine
2901. To prevent an increase in hepatitis B morbidity in the city hospitals, it is necessary to vaccinate the medical personnel. What should be used for immunization in this case?
*a. Recombinant vaccine
b. Interferon
c. Live attenuated vaccine
d. Inactivated vaccine
e. Arbidol (Umifenovir)
2902. To prevent an increase in hepatitis B morbidity in the city hospitals, it is necessary to vaccinate the medical personnel. What should be used for immunization in this case?
a. Live attenuated vaccine
b. Interferon
c. Arbidol (Umifenovir)
*d. Recombinant vaccine
e. Inactivated vaccine
2903. To speed up the healing process in a wound located on the patient's oral mucosa, the patient was prescribed a medicine that is a thermostable protein. This protein can be found in human tears, saliva, and breastmilk and it can be detected in freshly laid eggs. It is known as a factor of the body's natural resistance. Name this protein:
a. Complement
b. Interferon
c. Imanin
d. Interleukin
*e. Lysozyme
2904. To speed up the healing process in a wound located on the patient's oral mucosa, the patient was prescribed a medicine that is a thermostable protein. This protein can be found in human tears, saliva, and breastmilk and it can be detected in freshly laid eggs. It is known as a factor of the body's natural resistance. Name this protein:
a. Imanin
b. Interleukin
*c. Lysozyme
d. Complement
e. Interferon
2905. To speed up the healing process in a wound located on the patient's oral mucosa, the patient was prescribed a medicine that is a thermostable protein. This protein can be found in human tears, saliva, and breastmilk and it can be detected in freshly laid eggs. It is known as a factor of the body's natural resistance. Name this protein:
a. Imanin
b. Interleukin
c. Complement
d. Interferon
*e. Lysozyme
2906. To stimulate the labor activity of a woman, the doctor prescribed her prostaglandin E_2. What acid is used to synthesize this compound?
*a. Arachidonic
b. Palmitic
c. Phosphatidic
d. Stearic
e. Glutamic
2907. To stimulate the labor activity of a woman, the doctor prescribed her prostaglandin E_2. What acid is used to synthesize this compound?
a. Palmitic
*b. Arachidonic
c. Phosphatidic
d. Glutamic
e. Stearic
2908. To stimulate the labor activity of a woman, the doctor prescribed her prostaglandin E_2. What acid is used to synthesize this compound?
a. Stearic
b. Phosphatidic
c. Palmitic
d. Glutamic
*e. Arachidonic
2909. To study the blood flow, a doctor placed the sensor in the area of the sulcus bicipitalis medialis. What vessel is being studied by the doctor?
a. A) axillaris
*b. A) brachialis
c. A) radialis
d. A) profunda brahii
e. A) ulnaris
2910. To study the blood flow, a doctor placed the sensor in the area of the sulcus bicipitalis medialis. What vessel is being studied by the doctor?
a. A) axillaris
b. A) profunda brahii
c. A) radialis
d. A) ulnaris
*e. A) brachialis
2911. To study the functional state of the kidneys, the challenge test with a para-aminohippuric acid (PAH) was used. What mechanism of urine formation can be studied using this test?
a. Concentration system
*b. Secretion system
c. Filtration system
d. Countercurrent system
e. Reabsorption system
2912. To study the functional state of the kidneys, the challenge test with a para-aminohippuric acid (PAH) was used. What mechanism of urine formation can be studied using this test?
a. Filtration system
b. Concentration system
c. Reabsorption system
d. Countercurrent system
*e. Secretion system
2913. To study the functional state of the kidneys, the challenge test with a para-aminohippuric acid (PAH) was used. What mechanism of urine formation can be studied using this test?
a. Reabsorption system
*b. Secretion system
c. Concentration system
d. Filtration system
e. Countercurrent system
2914. To take a sample of cerebrospinal fluid for analysis, a doctor makes a puncture into subarachnoid space. To prevent damage to the spinal cord, the needle must be inserted between the two following vertebrae:
a. I and II lumbar
b. XII thoracic and I lumbar
*c. III and IV lumbar
d. IV and V thoracic
e. XI and XII thoracic
2915. To take a sample of cerebrospinal fluid for analysis, a doctor makes a puncture into subarachnoid space. To prevent damage to the spinal cord, the needle must be inserted between the two following vertebrae:
a. XI and XII thoracic
*b. III and IV lumbar
c. XII thoracic and I lumbar
d. IV and V thoracic
e. I and II lumbar
2916. To take a sample of cerebrospinal fluid for analysis, a doctor makes a puncture into subarachnoid space. To prevent damage to the spinal cord, the needle must be inserted between the two following vertebrae:
a. XI and XII thoracic
b. IV and V thoracic
c. XII thoracic and I lumbar
*d. III and IV lumbar
e. I and II lumbar
2917. To terminate a bronchial asthma attack that developed in the patient during the tooth extraction, the patient was given salbutamol. This drug belongs to the following pharmacological group:
a. Adaptogens
b. Analeptics
c. Muscarinic agonists
d. Narcotic analgesics
*e. Beta-2-adrenergic agonists
2918. To terminate a bronchial asthma attack that developed in the patient during the tooth extraction, the patient was given salbutamol. This drug belongs to the following pharmacological group:
a. Analeptics
b. Narcotic analgesics
c. Muscarinic agonists
d. Adaptogens
*e. Beta-2-adrenergic agonists
2919. To terminate a bronchial asthma attack that developed in the patient during the tooth extraction, the patient was given salbutamol. This drug belongs to the following pharmacological group:
a. Narcotic analgesics
b. Analeptics
c. Muscarinic agonists
d. Adaptogens
*e. Beta-2-adrenergic agonists
2920. To terminate hypertensive crisis the patient was administered solution of magnesium sulfate. What route of drug administration should be chosen?
a. Duodenal
b. Rectal
c. Intra-arterial
*d. Intravenous
e. Oral
2921. To terminate hypertensive crisis the patient was administered solution of magnesium sulfate. What route of drug administration should be chosen?
a. Intra-arterial
b. Duodenal
*c. Intravenous
d. Rectal
e. Oral
2922. To terminate hypertensive crisis the patient was administered solution of magnesium sulfate. What route of drug administration should be chosen?
a. Rectal
*b. Intravenous
c. Intra-arterial
d. Duodenal
e. Oral
2923. To treat ischemic heart disease, a patient was prescribed a beta-adrenergic blocking agent. After a time he developed a cough and bronchospasm. What drug can cause these side effects?
a. Atenolol
*b. Anaprilin (Propranolol)
c. Talinolol
d. Phenihidine (Nifedipine)
e. Metoprolol
2924. To treat ischemic heart disease, a patient was prescribed a beta-adrenergic blocking agent. After a time he developed a cough and bronchospasm. What drug can cause these side effects?
a. Atenolol
b. Talinolol
c. Phenihidine (Nifedipine)
d. Metoprolol
*e. Anaprilin (Propranolol)
2925. To treat ischemic heart disease, a patient was prescribed a beta-adrenergic blocking agent. After a time he developed a cough and bronchospasm. What drug can cause these side effects?
a. Talinolol
b. Phenihidine (Nifedipine)
*c. Anaprilin (Propranolol)
d. Atenolol
e. Metoprolol
2926. To treat osteomyelitis, a patient was prescribed an antibiotic that easily penetrates into bone tissue. Name this drug:
*a. Lincomycin hydrochloride
b. Polymyxin B
c. Cefazolin
d. Streptomycin sulfate
e. Amphotericin B
2927. To treat osteomyelitis, a patient was prescribed an antibiotic that easily penetrates into bone tissue. Name this drug:
a. Cefazolin
b. Polymyxin B
*c. Lincomycin hydrochloride
d. Streptomycin sulfate
e. Amphotericin B
2928. To treat osteomyelitis, a patient was prescribed an antibiotic that easily penetrates into bone tissue. Name this drug:
a. Streptomycin sulfate
*b. Lincomycin hydrochloride
c. Polymyxin B
d. Amphotericin B
e. Cefazolin
2929. To treat tuberculosis, an antibiotic that colors urine red is prescribed. Name this antibiotic:
*a. Rifampicin
b. Amoxicillin
c. Nitroxoline
d. Cefotaxime
e. Erythromycin
2930. To treat tuberculosis, an antibiotic that colors urine red is prescribed. Name this antibiotic:
a. Erythromycin
b. Nitroxoline
c. Cefotaxime
*d. Rifampicin
e. Amoxicillin
2931. To treat tuberculosis, an antibiotic that colors urine red is prescribed. Name this antibiotic:
a. Nitroxoline
b. Amoxicillin
*c. Rifampicin
d. Cefotaxime
e. Erythromycin
2932. Trying to lose weight, a woman has limited the amount of products in her diet. Three months later she developed edema and increased urine output, which indicates that her diet is low on the following type of nutrients:
a. Lipids
b. Minerals
c. Carbohydrates
d. Vitamins
*e. Proteins
2933. Trying to lose weight, a woman has limited the amount of products in her diet. Three months later she developed edema and increased urine output, which indicates that her diet is low on the following type of nutrients:
a. Lipids
b. Minerals
c. Vitamins
*d. Proteins
e. Carbohydrates
2934. Trying to lose weight, a woman has limited the amount of products in her diet. Three months later she developed edema and increased urine output, which indicates that her diet is low on the following type of nutrients:
a. Vitamins
b. Minerals
c. Lipids
d. Carbohydrates
*e. Proteins
2935. Two nucleotides have been lost in the sequence of DNA nucleotides due to the effect of radiation. What type of mutation occurred in the DNA strand?
*a. Deletion
b. Duplication
c. Inversion
d. Replication
e. Translocation
2936. Two nucleotides have been lost in the sequence of DNA nucleotides due to the effect of radiation. What type of mutation occurred in the DNA strand?
a. Duplication
b. Inversion
c. Replication
d. Translocation
*e. Deletion
2937. Two nucleotides have been lost in the sequence of DNA nucleotides due to the effect of radiation. What type of mutation occurred in the DNA strand?
a. Inversion
b. Translocation
*c. Deletion
d. Duplication
e. Replication
2938. Two weeks after the recovery from tonsillitis, a 17-year-old young man developed acute diffuse glomerulonephritis. What is the most common cause of this complication?
*a. Streptococci
b. Candida fungi
c. Mycobacterium tuberculosis
d. Staphylococci
e. Viruses
2939. Two weeks after the recovery from tonsillitis, a 17-year-old young man developed acute diffuse glomerulonephritis. What is the most common cause of this complication?
a. Mycobacterium tuberculosis
b. Staphylococci
*c. Streptococci
d. Viruses
e. Candida fungi
2940. Two weeks after the recovery from tonsillitis, a 17-year-old young man developed acute diffuse glomerulonephritis. What is the most common cause of this complication?
a. Viruses
b. Mycobacterium tuberculosis
c. Candida fungi
d. Staphylococci
*e. Streptococci
2941. Two years after a tooth extraction, the patient presents with a decrease in the volume of the tooth socket. What pathological process does it indicate?
a. Atrophy caused by insufficient blood  circulation
*b. Dysfunctional atrophy
c. Atrophy caused by physical factors
d. Neurotic atrophy
e. Pressure-induced atrophy
2942. Two years after a tooth extraction, the patient presents with a decrease in the volume of the tooth socket. What pathological process does it indicate?
a. Atrophy caused by insufficient blood  circulation
*b. Dysfunctional atrophy
c. Atrophy caused by physical factors
d. Pressure-induced atrophy
e. Neurotic atrophy
2943. Two years after a tooth extraction, the patient presents with a decrease in the volume of the tooth socket. What pathological process does it indicate?
a. Atrophy caused by insufficient blood  circulation
b. Neurotic atrophy
c. Atrophy caused by physical factors
*d. Dysfunctional atrophy
e. Pressure-induced atrophy
2944. Tyrosine is used as a substrate in thyroxine synthesis. What chemical element takes part in this process?
a. Iron
b. Calcium
*c. Iodine
d. Zinc
e. Copper
2945. Tyrosine is used as a substrate in thyroxine synthesis. What chemical element takes part in this process?
a. Iron
b. Copper
*c. Iodine
d. Zinc
e. Calcium
2946. Tyrosine is used as a substrate in thyroxine synthesis. What chemical element takes part in this process?
a. Zinc
b. Iron
c. Calcium
d. Copper
*e. Iodine
2947. Ultrasound of a 1.5-year-old child showed a non-union of the foramen ovale. Where in the heart is this anatomic structure located?
a. -
b. Left ventricular wall
*c. Interatrial septum
d. Right ventricular wall
e. Interventricular septum
2948. Ultrasound of a 1.5-year-old child showed a non-union of the foramen ovale. Where in the heart is this anatomic structure located?
a. Left ventricular wall
b. -
*c. Interatrial septum
d. Interventricular septum
e. Right ventricular wall
2949. Ultrasound of a 1.5-year-old child showed a non-union of the foramen ovale. Where in the heart is this anatomic structure located?
a. Left ventricular wall
b. Right ventricular wall
*c. Interatrial septum
d. -
e. Interventricular septum
2950. Under the influence of ionizing radiation or in case of avitaminosis E, an increased permeability of lysosome membranes can be observed in the cells. What are the likely consequences of such pathology?
a. Formation of the mitotic spindle
b. Restoration of the cytoplasmic  membrane
c. Intensive energy synthesis
*d. Partial or complete destruction of the  cell
e. Intensive protein synthesis
2951. Under the influence of ionizing radiation or in case of avitaminosis E, an increased permeability of lysosome membranes can be observed in the cells. What are the likely consequences of such pathology?
a. Intensive protein synthesis
b. Restoration of the cytoplasmic  membrane
*c. Partial or complete destruction of the  cell
d. Formation of the mitotic spindle
e. Intensive energy synthesis
2952. Under the influence of ionizing radiation or in case of avitaminosis E, an increased permeability of lysosome membranes can be observed in the cells. What are the likely consequences of such pathology?
a. Intensive protein synthesis
b. Restoration of the cytoplasmic  membrane
*c. Partial or complete destruction of the  cell
d. Intensive energy synthesis
e. Formation of the mitotic spindle
2953. Urinalysis shows glucosuria in a patient with diabetes mellitus. What is the renal threshold for glucose?
*a. 8.88 mmol/L
b. 1.0 mmol/L
c. 20.0 mmol/L
d. 15.5 mmol/L
e. 5.55 mmol/L
2954. Urinalysis shows glucosuria in a patient with diabetes mellitus. What is the renal threshold for glucose?
a. 1.0 mmol/L
*b. 8.88 mmol/L
c. 5.55 mmol/L
d. 20.0 mmol/L
e. 15.5 mmol/L
2955. Urinalysis shows glucosuria in a patient with diabetes mellitus. What is the renal threshold for glucose?
a. 1.0 mmol/L
b. 15.5 mmol/L
c. 5.55 mmol/L
*d. 8.88 mmol/L
e. 20.0 mmol/L
2956. Various substances can be used as anticoagulants. Among them there is a certain naturally derived polysaccharide. Name this polysaccharide:
*a. Heparin
b. Dermatan sulfate
c. Dextran
d. Chondroitin sulfate
e. Hyaluronic acid
2957. Various substances can be used as anticoagulants. Among them there is a certain naturally derived polysaccharide. Name this polysaccharide:
a. Dermatan sulfate
*b. Heparin
c. Hyaluronic acid
d. Chondroitin sulfate
e. Dextran
2958. Various substances can be used as anticoagulants. Among them there is a certain naturally derived polysaccharide. Name this polysaccharide:
a. Hyaluronic acid
b. Dextran
c. Dermatan sulfate
d. Chondroitin sulfate
*e. Heparin
2959. Various types of muscle contractions occurring in the alimentary canal of a test animal were studied and their different functional purposes were determined. It was noted that only one type of motor activity occurred in the circular and longitudinal muscles. Name this motor activity:
*a. Peristalsis
b. Tonic contraction of sphincters
c. Pendular movements of intestine
d. Nonpropulsive segmental activity
e. Mastication
2960. Various types of muscle contractions occurring in the alimentary canal of a test animal were studied and their different functional purposes were determined. It was noted that only one type of motor activity occurred in the circular and longitudinal muscles. Name this motor activity:
a. Nonpropulsive segmental activity
b. Tonic contraction of sphincters
*c. Peristalsis
d. Pendular movements of intestine
e. Mastication
2961. Various types of muscle contractions occurring in the alimentary canal of a test animal were studied and their different functional purposes were determined. It was noted that only one type of motor activity occurred in the circular and longitudinal muscles. Name this motor activity:
a. Pendular movements of intestine
b. Nonpropulsive segmental activity
c. Tonic contraction of sphincters
d. Mastication
*e. Peristalsis
2962. Villikinin synthesis is impaired in a patient. What motor function of the small intestine will be disturbed in this case?
*a. Microvillar contractions
b. Peristaltic contractions
c. Pendulum contractions
d. Tonic contractions
e. Rhythmic segmentation
2963. Villikinin synthesis is impaired in a patient. What motor function of the small intestine will be disturbed in this case?
a. Rhythmic segmentation
b. Peristaltic contractions
c. Pendulum contractions
d. Tonic contractions
*e. Microvillar contractions
2964. Villikinin synthesis is impaired in a patient. What motor function of the small intestine will be disturbed in this case?
a. Tonic contractions
b. Peristaltic contractions
*c. Microvillar contractions
d. Pendulum contractions
e. Rhythmic segmentation
2965. Vitamin D_3 in the human body undergoes a number of biochemical transformations with formation of its most bioactive derivative - calcitriol. What hormone is needed to activate the enzymatic reactions of oxidative hydroxylation of this vitamin in the kidneys?
*a. Parathyroid hormone
b. Calcitonin
c. Cortisol
d. Aldosterone
e. Thyroxine
2966. Vitamin D_3 in the human body undergoes a number of biochemical transformations with formation of its most bioactive derivative - calcitriol. What hormone is needed to activate the enzymatic reactions of oxidative hydroxylation of this vitamin in the kidneys?
a. Thyroxine
b. Calcitonin
c. Cortisol
d. Aldosterone
*e. Parathyroid hormone
2967. What antimicrobial drug is not a cephalosporin antibiotic?
*a. Ciprofloxacin
b. Cefazolin
c. Ceftriaxone
d. Cefepime
e. Cefalexin
2968. What antimicrobial drug is not a cephalosporin antibiotic?
a. Cefepime
b. Cefalexin
c. Cefazolin
d. Ceftriaxone
*e. Ciprofloxacin
2969. What antimicrobial drug is not a cephalosporin antibiotic?
a. Cefepime
b. Cefazolin
c. Cefalexin
d. Ceftriaxone
*e. Ciprofloxacin
2970. What artery can be damaged when conduction anesthesia is being administered to the area of mandibular foramen?
a. Buccal artery
b. Lingual artery
c. Pterygoid branches of the maxillary artery
*d. Inferior alveolar artery
e. Middle meningeal artery
2971. What artery can be damaged when conduction anesthesia is being administered to the area of mandibular foramen?
a. Buccal artery
b. Middle meningeal artery
c. Pterygoid branches of the maxillary artery
d. Lingual artery
*e. Inferior alveolar artery
2972. What artery can be damaged when conduction anesthesia is being administered to the area of mandibular foramen?
a. Middle meningeal artery
b. Pterygoid branches of the maxillary artery
c. Buccal artery
*d. Inferior alveolar artery
e. Lingual artery
2973. What bioactive substance stimulates the release of bicarbonate ions by the cells of the pancreatic ducts?
a. -
b. Histamine
c. Cholecystokinin-pancreozymin  (CCK-PZ)
*d. Secretin
e. Gastrin
2974. What bioactive substance stimulates the release of bicarbonate ions by the cells of the pancreatic ducts?
a. -
b. Histamine
c. Cholecystokinin-pancreozymin  (CCK-PZ)
d. Gastrin
*e. Secretin
2975. What bioactive substance stimulates the release of bicarbonate ions by the cells of the pancreatic ducts?
a. Cholecystokinin-pancreozymin  (CCK-PZ)
b. -
c. Histamine
d. Gastrin
*e. Secretin
2976. What component of the parodontium performs the sensory function that regulates the force of masticatory pressure applied to the teeth?
*a. Periodontium
b. Bones of the alveolar process
c. Periosteum
d. Cement
e. Gums
2977. What component of the parodontium performs the sensory function that regulates the force of masticatory pressure applied to the teeth?
a. Gums
*b. Periodontium
c. Bones of the alveolar process
d. Cement
e. Periosteum
2978. What component of the parodontium performs the sensory function that regulates the force of masticatory pressure applied to the teeth?
a. Gums
b. Bones of the alveolar process
c. Cement
*d. Periodontium
e. Periosteum
2979. What compound is the end product of purine nucleotide catabolism in the human body?
*a. Uric acid
b. Purine
c. Allantoin
d. Hypoxanthine
e. Xanthine
2980. What compound is the end product of purine nucleotide catabolism in the human body?
a. Allantoin
b. Purine
c. Hypoxanthine
d. Xanthine
*e. Uric acid
2981. What compound is the end product of purine nucleotide catabolism in the human body?
a. Allantoin
b. Xanthine
c. Purine
d. Hypoxanthine
*e. Uric acid
2982. What condition can develop as a result of infusing large volumes of isotonic solutions?
a. Oligocythemic hypovolemia
b. Simple hypervolemia
c. Polycythemic hypervolemia
d. Polycythemic hypovolemia
*e. Oligocythemic hypervolemia
2983. What condition can develop as a result of infusing large volumes of isotonic solutions?
a. Polycythemic hypervolemia
*b. Oligocythemic hypervolemia
c. Oligocythemic hypovolemia
d. Simple hypervolemia
e. Polycythemic hypovolemia
2984. What condition can develop as a result of infusing large volumes of isotonic solutions?
a. Polycythemic hypovolemia
b. Simple hypervolemia
*c. Oligocythemic hypervolemia
d. Polycythemic hypervolemia
e. Oligocythemic hypovolemia
2985. What diuretic will produce no effect in a patient with Addison disease?
a. Furosemide
b. Triamterene
c. Ethacrynic acid
*d. Spironolactone
e. Hydrochlorothiazide
2986. What diuretic will produce no effect in a patient with Addison disease?
a. Hydrochlorothiazide
b. Ethacrynic acid
c. Furosemide
d. Triamterene
*e. Spironolactone
2987. What diuretic will produce no effect in a patient with Addison disease?
a. Triamterene
*b. Spironolactone
c. Furosemide
d. Ethacrynic acid
e. Hydrochlorothiazide
2988. What drug belongs to the pharmacotherapeutic group of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors?
*a. Enalapril
b. Anaprilin (Propranolol)
c. Verapamil
d. Pentamin (Azamethonium bromide)
e. Reserpine
2989. What drug belongs to the pharmacotherapeutic group of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors?
a. Pentamin (Azamethonium bromide)
*b. Enalapril
c. Anaprilin (Propranolol)
d. Verapamil
e. Reserpine
2990. What drug belongs to the pharmacotherapeutic group of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors?
a. Reserpine
b. Pentamin (Azamethonium bromide)
c. Anaprilin (Propranolol)
d. Verapamil
*e. Enalapril
2991. What drug can be used in treatment of ciliary arrhythmia, is a potassium channel blocker, alpha and beta dual receptor blocker, and can cumulate in the body?
*a. Amiodarone
b. Asparcam
c. Verapamil
d. Metoprolol
e. Nicotinamide
2992. What drug can be used in treatment of ciliary arrhythmia, is a potassium channel blocker, alpha and beta dual receptor blocker, and can cumulate in the body?
a. Nicotinamide
*b. Amiodarone
c. Verapamil
d. Asparcam
e. Metoprolol
2993. What drug can be used in treatment of ciliary arrhythmia, is a potassium channel blocker, alpha and beta dual receptor blocker, and can cumulate in the body?
a. Verapamil
b. Asparcam
c. Nicotinamide
d. Metoprolol
*e. Amiodarone
2994. What drug is a beta-lactam antibiotic?
a. Biseptol (Co-trimoxazole)
b. Ofloxacin
c. Erythromycin
*d. Benzylpenicillin
e. Tetracycline
2995. What drug is a beta-lactam antibiotic?
a. Erythromycin
b. Ofloxacin
*c. Benzylpenicillin
d. Biseptol (Co-trimoxazole)
e. Tetracycline
2996. What drug is a beta-lactam antibiotic?
a. Ofloxacin
b. Tetracycline
*c. Benzylpenicillin
d. Erythromycin
e. Biseptol (Co-trimoxazole)
2997. What drug that can penetrate into bone tissue and bone marrow is advisable for the treatment of skeletal system infections (osteomyelitis, osteitis)?
a. Benzylpenicillin
b. Bicillin-3
*c. Lincomycin
d. Gentamicin
e. Synthomycin (D,L-chloramphenicol)
2998. What drug that can penetrate into bone tissue and bone marrow is advisable for the treatment of skeletal system infections (osteomyelitis, osteitis)?
a. Benzylpenicillin
b. Bicillin-3
c. Synthomycin (D,L-chloramphenicol)
d. Gentamicin
*e. Lincomycin
2999. What drug that can penetrate into bone tissue and bone marrow is advisable for the treatment of skeletal system infections (osteomyelitis, osteitis)?
a. Gentamicin
b. Synthomycin (D,L-chloramphenicol)
c. Benzylpenicillin
d. Bicillin-3
*e. Lincomycin
3000. What drugs are used for specific treatment of diphtheria?
*a. Antitoxic serum
b. Placental gamma globulin
c. Antibiotics
d. Anatoxin
e. Native plasma
3001. What drugs are used for specific treatment of diphtheria?
a. Anatoxin
*b. Antitoxic serum
c. Native plasma
d. Antibiotics
e. Placental gamma globulin
3002. What drugs are used for specific treatment of diphtheria?
a. Anatoxin
b. Placental gamma globulin
c. Native plasma
d. Antibiotics
*e. Antitoxic serum
3003. What enzyme has demineralization effect, i. e. intensifies decomposition of mineral components of the tooth tissues?
a. Alkaline phosphatase
b. Glucose 6-phosphatase
c. Glycogen phosphorylase
d. Phosphotransferase
*e. Acid phosphatase
3004. What enzyme has demineralization effect, i. e. intensifies decomposition of mineral components of the tooth tissues?
a. Alkaline phosphatase
b. Glycogen phosphorylase
c. Glucose 6-phosphatase
d. Phosphotransferase
*e. Acid phosphatase
3005. What enzyme has demineralization effect, i. e. intensifies decomposition of mineral components of the tooth tissues?
a. Glycogen phosphorylase
b. Phosphotransferase
*c. Acid phosphatase
d. Glucose 6-phosphatase
e. Alkaline phosphatase
3006. What helminthiasis typically has natural foci, where population eats freshwater fish?
a. Dicroceliasis
b. Taeniasis
*c. Opisthorchiasis
d. Echinococcosis
e. Fascioliasis
3007. What helminthiasis typically has natural foci, where population eats freshwater fish?
a. Echinococcosis
b. Dicroceliasis
c. Taeniasis
d. Fascioliasis
*e. Opisthorchiasis
3008. What helminthiasis typically has natural foci, where population eats freshwater fish?
a. Echinococcosis
b. Taeniasis
c. Fascioliasis
d. Dicroceliasis
*e. Opisthorchiasis
3009. What hormone has a marked anti-inflammatory, antiallergic, and immunosuppressive effect?
a. Adrenaline
*b. Hydrocortisone
c. Thyroxine
d. Somatotropin
e. Aldosterone
3010. What hormone has a marked anti-inflammatory, antiallergic, and immunosuppressive effect?
a. Aldosterone
b. Somatotropin
c. Thyroxine
*d. Hydrocortisone
e. Adrenaline
3011. What hormone has a marked anti-inflammatory, antiallergic, and immunosuppressive effect?
a. Thyroxine
b. Aldosterone
c. Somatotropin
d. Adrenaline
*e. Hydrocortisone
3012. What hormone of parotid glands intensifies teeth mineralization by stimulating calcium supply to the calcified tissues?
*a. Parotin
b. Calcitonin
c. Glucagon
d. Cortisol
e. Parathyrin
3013. What hormone of parotid glands intensifies teeth mineralization by stimulating calcium supply to the calcified tissues?
a. Glucagon
b. Parathyrin
c. Calcitonin
*d. Parotin
e. Cortisol
3014. What hormone of parotid glands intensifies teeth mineralization by stimulating calcium supply to the calcified tissues?
a. Parathyrin
b. Cortisol
c. Calcitonin
*d. Parotin
e. Glucagon
3015. What hormone stimulates the inclusion of calcium into the osteoblasts of dental bone tissues?
*a. Calcitonin
b. Parathyroid hormone
c. Thyroxine
d. Insulin
e. Cortisol
3016. What hormone stimulates the inclusion of calcium into the osteoblasts of dental bone tissues?
a. Insulin
*b. Calcitonin
c. Parathyroid hormone
d. Cortisol
e. Thyroxine
3017. What hormone stimulates the inclusion of calcium into the osteoblasts of dental bone tissues?
a. Parathyroid hormone
b. Thyroxine
c. Cortisol
d. Insulin
*e. Calcitonin
3018. What immunoglobulins produced in salivary glands ensure local immunity of oral mucosa?
*a. Ig
b. IgM
c. IgE
d. IgD
e. IgG
3019. What immunoglobulins produced in salivary glands ensure local immunity of oral mucosa?
*a. Ig
b. IgM
c. IgG
d. IgD
e. IgE
3020. What immunoglobulins produced in salivary glands ensure local immunity of oral mucosa?
a. IgD
b. IgE
*c. Ig
d. IgM
e. IgG
3021. What internal organ plays the largest role in the humoral regulation of erythropoiesis?
*a. Kidneys
b. Liver
c. Lungs
d. Gastrointestinal tract
e. Pancreas
3022. What internal organ plays the largest role in the humoral regulation of erythropoiesis?
a. Gastrointestinal tract
b. Pancreas
c. Lungs
*d. Kidneys
e. Liver
3023. What internal organ plays the largest role in the humoral regulation of erythropoiesis?
a. Lungs
b. Pancreas
c. Liver
*d. Kidneys
e. Gastrointestinal tract
3024. What is the heart rate of a patient diagnosed with paroxysmal tachycardia?
*a. <140/min.
b. 120-130/min.
c. 100-110/min.
d. 90-100/min.
e. 110-120/min.
3025. What is the heart rate of a patient diagnosed with paroxysmal tachycardia?
a. 120-130/min.
b. 110-120/min.
c. 90-100/min.
d. 100-110/min.
*e. <140/min.
3026. What is the heart rate of a patient diagnosed with paroxysmal tachycardia?
a. 90-100/min.
*b. <140/min.
c. 100-110/min.
d. 110-120/min.
e. 120-130/min.
3027. What is the mechanism of ESR acceleration in pregnant women?
*a. Increased fibrinogen levels
b. Increased albumin levels
c. Increased blood volume
d. Increased erythrocyte count
e. Intensified function of the bone marrow
3028. What is the mechanism of ESR acceleration in pregnant women?
a. Increased blood volume
*b. Increased fibrinogen levels
c. Intensified function of the bone marrow
d. Increased erythrocyte count
e. Increased albumin levels
3029. What is the mechanism of ESR acceleration in pregnant women?
a. Intensified function of the bone marrow
b. Increased erythrocyte count
c. Increased albumin levels
d. Increased blood volume
*e. Increased fibrinogen levels
3030. What microflora predominates at the beginning of dental plaque formation on the tooth surface?
a. Fusobacteria
*b. Streptococci, Veillonella
c. Bacteroids, Candida
d. Leptotrichia
e. Obligate anaerobes
3031. What microflora predominates at the beginning of dental plaque formation on the tooth surface?
a. Fusobacteria
b. Bacteroids, Candida
c. Leptotrichia
*d. Streptococci, Veillonella
e. Obligate anaerobes
3032. What microflora predominates at the beginning of dental plaque formation on the tooth surface?
a. Fusobacteria
b. Leptotrichia
c. Obligate anaerobes
*d. Streptococci, Veillonella
e. Bacteroids, Candida
3033. What nerves must be anesthetized for extraction of an upper third molar?
a. Anterior superior alveolar nerves
*b. Posterior superior alveolar nerves
c. Middle superior alveolar nerves
d. Greater palatine nerve
e. Posterior superior nasal nerves
3034. What nerves must be anesthetized for extraction of an upper third molar?
a. Posterior superior nasal nerves
*b. Posterior superior alveolar nerves
c. Greater palatine nerve
d. Anterior superior alveolar nerves
e. Middle superior alveolar nerves
3035. What nerves must be anesthetized for extraction of an upper third molar?
a. Posterior superior nasal nerves
b. Middle superior alveolar nerves
c. Anterior superior alveolar nerves
*d. Posterior superior alveolar nerves
e. Greater palatine nerve
3036. What nitrate drug would you recommend to a patient with ischemic heart disease for prevention of angina pectoris attacks?
a. Lisinopril
b. Menthol
*c. Isosorbide mononitrate
d. Lovastatin
e. Nitroglycerine
3037. What nitrate drug would you recommend to a patient with ischemic heart disease for prevention of angina pectoris attacks?
a. Lovastatin
*b. Isosorbide mononitrate
c. Menthol
d. Lisinopril
e. Nitroglycerine
3038. What nitrate drug would you recommend to a patient with ischemic heart disease for prevention of angina pectoris attacks?
a. Lovastatin
b. Nitroglycerine
*c. Isosorbide mononitrate
d. Lisinopril
e. Menthol
3039. What non-collagenous proteins belong to the organic part of periodontal bone tissue?
a. Albumins, globulins
*b. Osteocalcin, osteonectin
c. Fibrinogen, prothrombin
d. Collagen, elastin
e. Enamelin, amelogenin
3040. What non-collagenous proteins belong to the organic part of periodontal bone tissue?
a. Albumins, globulins
b. Enamelin, amelogenin
*c. Osteocalcin, osteonectin
d. Collagen, elastin
e. Fibrinogen, prothrombin
3041. What non-collagenous proteins belong to the organic part of periodontal bone tissue?
a. Fibrinogen, prothrombin
*b. Osteocalcin, osteonectin
c. Albumins, globulins
d. Enamelin, amelogenin
e. Collagen, elastin
3042. What organelles carry out the process of digestion and excretion of the remains?
*a. Lysosomes
b. Ribosomes
c. Golgi complex
d. Mitochondria
e. Centrosome
3043. What organelles carry out the process of digestion and excretion of the remains?
a. Golgi complex
*b. Lysosomes
c. Ribosomes
d. Mitochondria
e. Centrosome
3044. What organelles carry out the process of digestion and excretion of the remains?
a. Ribosomes
b. Centrosome
c. Mitochondria
*d. Lysosomes
e. Golgi complex
3045. What organelles in muscle tissue take part in the intensive aerobic process of energy accumulation in the form of macroergic bonds of ATP?
a. Granular endoplasmic reticulum
b. Lysosomes
*c. Mitochondria
d. Smooth endoplasmic reticulum
e. Centrosome
3046. What organelles in muscle tissue take part in the intensive aerobic process of energy accumulation in the form of macroergic bonds of ATP?
a. Lysosomes
b. Smooth endoplasmic reticulum
c. Centrosome
*d. Mitochondria
e. Granular endoplasmic reticulum
3047. What organelles in muscle tissue take part in the intensive aerobic process of energy accumulation in the form of macroergic bonds of ATP?
a. Smooth endoplasmic reticulum
b. Granular endoplasmic reticulum
c. Lysosomes
*d. Mitochondria
e. Centrosome
3048. What parasite has a mollusk as an intermediate host?
a. Giardia
b. Diphyllobothrium latum
c. Echinococcus
d. Trichinella
*e. Fasciola hepatica
3049. What parasite has a mollusk as an intermediate host?
a. Trichinella
b. Giardia
*c. Fasciola hepatica
d. Echinococcus
e. Diphyllobothrium latum
3050. What parasite has a mollusk as an intermediate host?
a. Trichinella
b. Giardia
c. Diphyllobothrium latum
d. Echinococcus
*e. Fasciola hepatica
3051. What process becomes disturbed, if salivary pH drops below 6.5?
a. -
b. Dental blood supply
c. Intensity of metabolic processes in the pulp
d. Dentin formation
*e. Supply of hard dental tissues with mineral substances
3052. What process becomes disturbed, if salivary pH drops below 6.5?
a. Dentin formation
b. Dental blood supply
c. Intensity of metabolic processes in the pulp
*d. Supply of hard dental tissues with mineral substances
e. -
3053. What process becomes disturbed, if salivary pH drops below 6.5?
a. Intensity of metabolic processes in the pulp
b. Dental blood supply
c. Dentin formation
*d. Supply of hard dental tissues with mineral substances
e. -
3054. What property is not characteristic of low molecular weight heparins, such as enoxaparin, fraxiparine (nadroparin calcium), etc.?
a. An increase in the inhibitory effect of antithrombin III on factor Xa
*b. No inhibitory effect on thrombin
c. Antiplatelet and anticoagulant activity
d. Bioavailability is higher than that of heparin
e. Injected subcutaneously 1-2 times a day
3055. What property is not characteristic of low molecular weight heparins, such as enoxaparin, fraxiparine (nadroparin calcium), etc.?
a. An increase in the inhibitory effect of antithrombin III on factor Xa
*b. No inhibitory effect on thrombin
c. Antiplatelet and anticoagulant activity
d. Injected subcutaneously 1-2 times a day
e. Bioavailability is higher than that of heparin
3056. What property is not characteristic of low molecular weight heparins, such as enoxaparin, fraxiparine (nadroparin calcium), etc.?
a. An increase in the inhibitory effect of antithrombin III on factor Xa
b. Antiplatelet and anticoagulant activity
c. Injected subcutaneously 1-2 times a day
*d. No inhibitory effect on thrombin
e. Bioavailability is higher than that of heparin
3057. What receptors respond to changes in gas composition of the blood that enters the brain?
*a. Carotid sinus receptors
b. Bulbar receptors
c. All of the listed
d. Aortic receptors
e. -
3058. What receptors respond to changes in gas composition of the blood that enters the brain?
a. -
b. Bulbar receptors
c. Aortic receptors
*d. Carotid sinus receptors
e. All of the listed
3059. What receptors respond to changes in gas composition of the blood that enters the brain?
a. Aortic receptors
b. All of the listed
*c. Carotid sinus receptors
d. Bulbar receptors
e. -
3060. What receptors respond to the gas composition of the blood that enters the brain?
*a. Carotid sinus receptors
b. Bulbar receptors
c. Mechanoreceptors
d. Nociceptors
e. Aortic receptors
3061. What receptors respond to the gas composition of the blood that enters the brain?
a. Nociceptors
b. Bulbar receptors
c. Aortic receptors
d. Mechanoreceptors
*e. Carotid sinus receptors
3062. What receptors respond to the gas composition of the blood that enters the brain?
a. Nociceptors
b. Mechanoreceptors
c. Aortic receptors
*d. Carotid sinus receptors
e. Bulbar receptors
3063. What serological reaction requires 5 ingredients: antigen, antibody, and complement (the first system) and sheep erythrocytes and hemolytic serum (the second system)?
a. Hemagglutination inhibition
*b. omplement fixation
c. Passive (indirect) hemagglutination
d. Neutralization
e. Precipitation
3064. What serological reaction requires 5 ingredients: antigen, antibody, and complement (the first system) and sheep erythrocytes and hemolytic serum (the second system)?
a. Neutralization
b. Passive (indirect) hemagglutination
c. Precipitation
d. Hemagglutination inhibition
*e. omplement fixation
3065. What serological reaction requires 5 ingredients: antigen, antibody, and complement (the first system) and sheep erythrocytes and hemolytic serum (the second system)?
a. Precipitation
b. Passive (indirect) hemagglutination
c. Neutralization
*d. omplement fixation
e. Hemagglutination inhibition
3066. What structure in the cell becomes the main target, when exposed to ionizing radiation?
*a. DNA
b. Cytoplasmic membrane
c. Ribosomes
d. Sarcoplasmic reticulum
e. Mitochondria
3067. What structure in the cell becomes the main target, when exposed to ionizing radiation?
*a. DNA
b. Mitochondria
c. Sarcoplasmic reticulum
d. Cytoplasmic membrane
e. Ribosomes
3068. What structure in the cell becomes the main target, when exposed to ionizing radiation?
a. Ribosomes
*b. DNA
c. Cytoplasmic membrane
d. Mitochondria
e. Sarcoplasmic reticulum
3069. What type of apatite makes up the largest portion of mineral component in the human teeth?
*a. Hydroxyapatite
b. Carbonate apatite
c. Fluorapatite
d. Chlorapatite
e. Strontium apatite
3070. What type of apatite makes up the largest portion of mineral component in the human teeth?
a. Carbonate apatite
*b. Hydroxyapatite
c. Strontium apatite
d. Fluorapatite
e. Chlorapatite
3071. What type of apatite makes up the largest portion of mineral component in the human teeth?
a. Fluorapatite
b. Chlorapatite
c. Carbonate apatite
*d. Hydroxyapatite
e. Strontium apatite
3072. What type of hemophilia inheritance results in men being affected by hemophilia and in women being carriers of this disease?
a. Autosomal dominant
b. Autosomal recessive
c. Holandric
d. X-linked dominant
*e. X-linked recessive
3073. What type of hemophilia inheritance results in men being affected by hemophilia and in women being carriers of this disease?
a. Autosomal recessive
*b. X-linked recessive
c. X-linked dominant
d. Holandric
e. Autosomal dominant
3074. What type of hemophilia inheritance results in men being affected by hemophilia and in women being carriers of this disease?
a. X-linked dominant
b. Holandric
c. Autosomal recessive
*d. X-linked recessive
e. Autosomal dominant
3075. What types of excretory ducts are distinguished in the large salivary glands?
a. Intralobular and extraglandular ducts
*b. Intralobular ducts, interlobular ducts,  and the primary duct of the gland
c. Intercalated ducts, striated ducts, and  the common duct
d. Intralobular ducts, striated ducts, and  the common duct
e. Intralobular and interlobular ducts
3076. What types of excretory ducts are distinguished in the large salivary glands?
a. Intralobular and extraglandular ducts
b. Intralobular ducts, striated ducts, and  the common duct
c. Intercalated ducts, striated ducts, and  the common duct
d. Intralobular and interlobular ducts
*e. Intralobular ducts, interlobular ducts,  and the primary duct of the gland
3077. What types of excretory ducts are distinguished in the large salivary glands?
a. Intralobular and interlobular ducts
b. Intralobular and extraglandular ducts
c. Intralobular ducts, striated ducts, and  the common duct
*d. Intralobular ducts, interlobular ducts,  and the primary duct of the gland
e. Intercalated ducts, striated ducts, and  the common duct
3078. When determining comparative tissue radiosensitivity, it was revealed that different tissues have different level of sensitivity toward ionizing radiation. What tissue of those listed below is the most radiosensitive?
*a. Hematopoietic
b. Nerve
c. Bone
d. Cartilaginous
e. Muscular
3079. When determining comparative tissue radiosensitivity, it was revealed that different tissues have different level of sensitivity toward ionizing radiation. What tissue of those listed below is the most radiosensitive?
a. Cartilaginous
b. Bone
*c. Hematopoietic
d. Muscular
e. Nerve
3080. When determining comparative tissue radiosensitivity, it was revealed that different tissues have different level of sensitivity toward ionizing radiation. What tissue of those listed below is the most radiosensitive?
a. Cartilaginous
b. Nerve
c. Muscular
*d. Hematopoietic
e. Bone
3081. When divers quickly rise from the depths to the surface, they risk developing decompression sickness that can result in death caused by gas embolism. What gas is produced in this case?
*a. N_2
b. NO_2
c. CO_2
d. CO
e. O_2
3082. When divers quickly rise from the depths to the surface, they risk developing decompression sickness that can result in death caused by gas embolism. What gas is produced in this case?
a. NO_2
b. CO_2
*c. N_2
d. O_2
e. CO
3083. When divers quickly rise from the depths to the surface, they risk developing decompression sickness that can result in death caused by gas embolism. What gas is produced in this case?
a. O_2
b. NO_2
*c. N_2
d. CO_2
e. CO
3084. When examining a 1-month-old child, the doctor noted open posterior fontanelle. At what age does it close, if a child develops normally?
*a. In the 2nd-3rd month of life
b. In the 2nd year of life
c. In the 6th month of life
d. In the 4th month of life
e. In the 5th month of life
3085. When examining a 1-month-old child, the doctor noted open posterior fontanelle. At what age does it close, if a child develops normally?
a. In the 4th month of life
b. In the 5th month of life
c. In the 6th month of life
d. In the 2nd year of life
*e. In the 2nd-3rd month of life
3086. When examining a 1-month-old child, the doctor noted open posterior fontanelle. At what age does it close, if a child develops normally?
a. In the 5th month of life
b. In the 2nd year of life
*c. In the 2nd-3rd month of life
d. In the 6th month of life
e. In the 4th month of life
3087. When preparing a dental plaque smear and staining it according to the Gram method, a student during microscopy detected there various violet and pink microorganisms. What structural component of microorganisms causes different response to stains?
a. Cytoplasm
b. Cytoplasmic membrane
c. Outer membrane
*d. Cell wall
e. Internal periplasmic space
3088. When preparing a dental plaque smear and staining it according to the Gram method, a student during microscopy detected there various violet and pink microorganisms. What structural component of microorganisms causes different response to stains?
a. Cytoplasmic membrane
b. Cytoplasm
*c. Cell wall
d. Internal periplasmic space
e. Outer membrane
3089. When preparing a dental plaque smear and staining it according to the Gram method, a student during microscopy detected there various violet and pink microorganisms. What structural component of microorganisms causes different response to stains?
a. Outer membrane
b. Internal periplasmic space
*c. Cell wall
d. Cytoplasmic membrane
e. Cytoplasm
3090. When providing dental care, the dentist received a trauma of the index finger. The skin was breached and the wound is likely to be contaminated with the patient's blood. In such cases regulations require for the patient to be examined for HIV-infection and viral hepatitis. What type of examination is necessary in this case?
a. Determine the causative agent by infecting cell culture
b. Study the level of T helper cells
*c. Study blood for hepatitis markers and anti-HIV antibodies
d. Inoculate blood sample on sugar broth
e. Identify specific antibodies
3091. When providing dental care, the dentist received a trauma of the index finger. The skin was breached and the wound is likely to be contaminated with the patient's blood. In such cases regulations require for the patient to be examined for HIV-infection and viral hepatitis. What type of examination is necessary in this case?
a. Inoculate blood sample on sugar broth
b. Determine the causative agent by infecting cell culture
c. Study the level of T helper cells
d. Identify specific antibodies
*e. Study blood for hepatitis markers and anti-HIV antibodies
3092. When providing dental care, the dentist received a trauma of the index finger. The skin was breached and the wound is likely to be contaminated with the patient's blood. In such cases regulations require for the patient to be examined for HIV-infection and viral hepatitis. What type of examination is necessary in this case?
a. Inoculate blood sample on sugar broth
b. Identify specific antibodies
c. Determine the causative agent by infecting cell culture
*d. Study blood for hepatitis markers and anti-HIV antibodies
e. Study the level of T helper cells
3093. When studying chemical composition of a tooth tissue, it is determined that 95-97% of this tissue consists of mineral substances (hydroxyapatite, carbonate apatite, fluorapatite), 1-2% consists of organic compounds, and 3% consists of water. What type of dental tissue is it?
a. Periodontium
b. Dentin
c. Cement
*d. Enamel
e. Pulp
3094. When studying chemical composition of a tooth tissue, it is determined that 95-97% of this tissue consists of mineral substances (hydroxyapatite, carbonate apatite, fluorapatite), 1-2% consists of organic compounds, and 3% consists of water. What type of dental tissue is it?
a. Periodontium
b. Pulp
c. Dentin
d. Cement
*e. Enamel
3095. When studying chemical composition of a tooth tissue, it is determined that 95-97% of this tissue consists of mineral substances (hydroxyapatite, carbonate apatite, fluorapatite), 1-2% consists of organic compounds, and 3% consists of water. What type of dental tissue is it?
a. Pulp
b. Periodontium
*c. Enamel
d. Cement
e. Dentin
3096. When studying masticatory muscles, a student discovered that only one of them does not raise the lower jaw. Name this muscle:
a. Anterior bundles of the temporal muscle
*b. Lateral pterygoid muscle
c. Medial bundles of the temporal muscle
d. Masseter
e. Medial pterygoid muscle
3097. When studying masticatory muscles, a student discovered that only one of them does not raise the lower jaw. Name this muscle:
a. Masseter
b. Anterior bundles of the temporal muscle
c. Medial bundles of the temporal muscle
*d. Lateral pterygoid muscle
e. Medial pterygoid muscle
3098. When studying masticatory muscles, a student discovered that only one of them does not raise the lower jaw. Name this muscle:
a. Medial bundles of the temporal muscle
b. Medial pterygoid muscle
c. Anterior bundles of the temporal muscle
*d. Lateral pterygoid muscle
e. Masseter
3099. While waiting for tooth extraction, a patient developed a bronchial asthma attack. To stop the bronchospasm, the patient needs to be prescribed a drug that belongs to the following pharmacological group:
a. Analeptics
*b. beta_2-adrenergic agonists
c. Muscarinic agonists
d. Psychostimulants
e. Analgesics
3100. While waiting for tooth extraction, a patient developed a bronchial asthma attack. To stop the bronchospasm, the patient needs to be prescribed a drug that belongs to the following pharmacological group:
a. Analgesics
b. Analeptics
*c. beta_2-adrenergic agonists
d. Psychostimulants
e. Muscarinic agonists
3101. While waiting for tooth extraction, a patient developed a bronchial asthma attack. To stop the bronchospasm, the patient needs to be prescribed a drug that belongs to the following pharmacological group:
a. Analgesics
b. Muscarinic agonists
c. Psychostimulants
*d. beta_2-adrenergic agonists
e. Analeptics
3102. With age a person develops wrinkled skin. This condition is predominantly caused by changes in certain skin structures. Name these structures:
*a. Elastic fiber
b. Epidermis
c. Amorphous substance
d. Collagen fibers
e. Subcutaneous fat
3103. With age a person develops wrinkled skin. This condition is predominantly caused by changes in certain skin structures. Name these structures:
a. Amorphous substance
b. Epidermis
*c. Elastic fiber
d. Subcutaneous fat
e. Collagen fibers
3104. With age a person develops wrinkled skin. This condition is predominantly caused by changes in certain skin structures. Name these structures:
a. Collagen fibers
b. Epidermis
*c. Elastic fiber
d. Subcutaneous fat
e. Amorphous substance
3105. X-ray detected pus accumulation in the sphenoidal sinus. The pus is being excreted into the following nasal meatus:
a. Left inferior nasal meatus
b. Left middle nasal meatus
c. Right middle nasal meatus
*d. Right and left superior nasal meatus
e. Right inferior nasal meatus
3106. X-ray detected pus accumulation in the sphenoidal sinus. The pus is being excreted into the following nasal meatus:
a. Right inferior nasal meatus
*b. Right and left superior nasal meatus
c. Left middle nasal meatus
d. Right middle nasal meatus
e. Left inferior nasal meatus
3107. X-ray detected pus accumulation in the sphenoidal sinus. The pus is being excreted into the following nasal meatus:
a. Right inferior nasal meatus
b. Left middle nasal meatus
c. Right middle nasal meatus
d. Left inferior nasal meatus
*e. Right and left superior nasal meatus
3108. X-ray scan shows a skull fracture. The line of the fracture passes through the supraorbital rim. What bone is damaged?
*a. Frontal bone
b. Maxilla
c. Occipital bone
d. Parietal bone
e. Temporal bone
3109. X-ray scan shows a skull fracture. The line of the fracture passes through the supraorbital rim. What bone is damaged?
a. Parietal bone
b. Maxilla
*c. Frontal bone
d. Occipital bone
e. Temporal bone
3110. X-ray scan shows a skull fracture. The line of the fracture passes through the supraorbital rim. What bone is damaged?
a. Temporal bone
b. Occipital bone
*c. Frontal bone
d. Parietal bone
e. Maxilla
3111. X-ray shows a cranial fracture. The fracture line passes through the superior nuchal line. What bone is damaged?
*a. Occipital bone
b. Frontal bone
c. Temporal bone
d. Parietal bone
e. Palatine bone
3112. X-ray shows a cranial fracture. The fracture line passes through the superior nuchal line. What bone is damaged?
a. Parietal bone
*b. Occipital bone
c. Frontal bone
d. Palatine bone
e. Temporal bone
3113. X-ray shows a cranial fracture. The fracture line passes through the superior nuchal line. What bone is damaged?
a. Parietal bone
*b. Occipital bone
c. Temporal bone
d. Frontal bone
e. Palatine bone
