1. PlagueNaturally acquired plague most commonly manifests in the bubonic form, with acute onset of fever and painful swollen regional lymph nodes (buboes). Less commonly, plague manifests in the septicemic form or as pneumonic plague, and, rarely, as meningeal, pharyngeal, ocular, or gastrointestinal plague. Abrupt onset of fever, chills, headache, and malaise are characteristic in all cases.Occasionally, patients have symptoms of mild lymphadenitis or prominent gastrointestinal tract symptoms, which may obscure the correct diagnosis.When left untreated, plague will often progress to overwhelming sepsis with renal failure, acute respiratory distress syndrome, instability, diffuse intravascular coagulation, necrosis of distal extremities, and death.Plague is caused by Yersinia pestis, a pleomorphic, bipolar-staining, gram-negative coccobacillus.Plague is a zoonotic infection primarily maintained in rodents and their fleas. Humans are incidental hosts who typically develop bubonic or primary septicemic manifestations through the bite of infected rodent fleas or direct contact with tissues of infected animals. Secondary pneumonic plague arises from hematogenous seeding of the lungs with Y pestis in patients with untreated bubonic or septicemic plague. Primary pneumonic plague is acquired by inhalation of respiratory tract droplets from a human or animal with pneumonic plague. Only the pneumonic form has been shown to be transmitted from person to person, and the last known case of person-to-person transmission in the United States occurred in 1924. Rarely, humans can develop primary pneumonic plague following exposure to domestic cats with respiratory tract plague infections. Plague occurs worldwide with enzootic foci in parts of Asia, Africa, and the Americas. Most human plague cases are reported from rural, underdeveloped areas and mainly occur as isolated cases or in small, focal clusters. Since 2000, more than 95% of the approximately 22,000 cases reported to the World Health Organization have been from countries in sub-Saharan Africa.

2. A plague is a severe illness and can often lead to death.
a. Not given
b. False
*c. True

3. Bubonic plague is the most common form of plague.
a. False
b. Not given
*c. True

4. Can the plague be transmitted from person to person?
a. Yes, it`s main way to its spreading
b. It is still unknown
*c. Yes, but it`s rare
d. No, it can never be the case

5. Choose the correct statement.
a. Only animals can have a plague
b. Animals are incidental hosts of Yersinia pestis
*c. Animals are main hosts of Yersinia pestis
d. Both animals and humans can be the main hosts of Yersinia pestis

6. How does secondary pneumonic plague occur?
a. Due to untreated primary pneumonic plague
b. Due to inhalation of respiratory tract droplets from a human or animal with pneumonic plague
c. Due to hematogenous seeding of the lungs with Y pestis in patients with respiratory diseases
*d. Due to hematogenous seeding of the lungs with Y pestis in patients with untreated other forms of plague

7. Most cases of plague are happening in big city centres.
*a. False
b. Not given
c. True

8. The rarest form of plague is meningeal.
a. False
*b. Not given
c. True

9. What are buboes?
a. The pathognomonic rash
*b. The lymph nodes that are swollen
c. The type of cells that are found in the blood
d. The pathognomonic type of fever

10. What is the most common way of plague transmission?
a. Person-to-person transmission
b. Haematogenic transmission
*c. Through the bite of infected rodent fleas or direct contact with tissues of infected animals
d. Inhalation of respiratory tract droplets from an animal with plague

