1. After consumption of rich food a patient has nausea and heartburn, steatorrhea. This condition might be caused by:
a. Amylase deficiency
b. Disturbed phospholipase synthesis
c. Increased lipase secretion
d. Disturbed tripsin synthesis
*e. Bile acid deficiency

2. Galactosemia is revealed in the child. Concentration of glucose in the blood is not considerably changed. Deficiency of what enzyme caused this illness?
a. Galactokinase
b. Hexokinase
c. Amylo-1,6-glucosidase
d. Phosphoglucomutase
*e. Galactose-1-phosphate uridyltransferase

3. Fatty of phospholipids is disordered due to fat infiltration of the liver. Indicate which of the presented substances can enhance the process of methylation during phospholipids synthesis?
a. Citrate
*b. Methionine
c. Glucose
d. Ascorbic acid
e. Glycerin

4. Characteristic sign of glycogenosis is muscle pain during physical work. Blood examination reveals usually hypoglycemia. This pathology is caused by congenital deficiency of the following enzyme:
a. Lysosomal glycosidase
*b. Glycogen phosphorylase
c. Alpha amylase
d. Glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase
e. Gamma amylase

5. An infant has apparent diarrhea resulting from improper feeding. One of the main diarrhea effects is plentiful excretion of sodium bicarbonate. What form of acid-base balance disorder is the case?
*a. Metabolic acidosis
b. Respiratory acidosis
c. No disorders of acid-base balance will be observed
d. Respiratory alkalosis
e. Metabolic alkalosis

6. Methotrexate (structural analogue of the folic acid which is competitive inhibitor of the dihydrofolatreductase) is prescribed for treatment of the malignant tumour.On which level does methotrexate inhibit synthesis of the nucleic acids?
a. Reparation
b. Processing
c. Replication
d. Transcription
*e. Mononucleotide synthesis

7. RNA-polymeraseB(II) is blocked due to amanitine poisoning (poison of death-cup). It disturbes:
a. Maturation of m-RNA
*b. Synthesis of m-RNA
c. Reverse transcription
d. Synthesis of t-RNA
e. Primers synthesis

8. Pain along large nervous stems and increased amount of pyruvate in the blood were revealed in the patient. Insufficiency of what vitamin can cause such change?
*a. В1
b. РР
c. Biotin
d. Pantothenic acid
e. В2

9. Patient with encephalopathy was admitted to the neurological in-patient department. Correlation of increasing of encephalopathy and substances absorbed by the bloodstream from the intestines was revealed. Whatsubstances that are created in the intestines can cause endotoxemia?
a. Butyrate
b. Biotin
c. Ornithine
*d. Indole
e. Acetacetate

10. Examination of a patient suffering from cancer of urinary bladder revealed high rate of serotonin and hydroxyanthranilic acid. It is caused by excess of the following amino acid in the organism:
a. Histidine
b. Alanine
*c. Tryptophan
d. Methionine
e. Tyrosine

11. A mother consulted a doctor about her 5-year-old child who develops erythemas, vesicular rash and skin itch under the influence of sun. Laboratory studies revealed decreased iron concentration in the blood serum, increased uroporphyrinogen I excretion with the urine. What is the most likely inherited pathology in this child?
a. Methemoglobinemia
b. Coproporphyria
c. Intermittent porphyria
*d. Erythropoietic porphyria
e. Hepatic porphyria

12. A 3 year old child with fever was given aspirin. It resulted in intensified erythrocyte haemolysis. Hemolytic anemia might have been caused by congenital insufficiency of the following enzyme:
a. Glycogen phosphorylase
b. Glucose 6-phosphatase
*c. Glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase
d. Glycerol phosphate dehydrogenase
e. γ-glutamiltransferase

13. Blood of a 12 year old boy presents low concentration of uric acid and accumulation of xanthine and hypoxanthine. This child has genetic defect of the following enzyme:
a. Ornithine carbamoyltransferase
b. Glycerylkinase
c. Arginase
d. Urease
*e. Xanthine oxidase

14. Increased amount of free fat acids is observed in the blood of the patients with diabetes mellitus. It can be caused by:
a. Activation of the synthesis of the apolipoproteins
b. Decreased activity of phosphatidylcholine-cholesterol-acyltransferase blood plasma
c. Storage of palmitatoil-CoA
d. Activation of the ketone bodies utilization
*e. Increased activity of triglyceridelipase adipocytes

15. A 46-year-old female patient has a continuous history of progressive muscular (Duchennes) dystrophy. Which blood enzyme changes will be of diagnostic value in this case?
a. Adenylate cyclase
*b. Creatine phosphokinase
c. Pyruvate dehydrogenase
d. Lactate dehydrogenase
e. Glutamate dehydrogenase

16. A patient is ill with diabetes mellitus that is accompanied by hyperglycemia of over 7,2 Mmol/l on an empty stomach. The level of what blood plasma protein allows to estimate the glycemia rate retrospectively (4-8 weeks before examination)?
a. C-reactive protein
b. Ceruloplasmin
c. Albumin
d. Fibrinogen
*e. Glycated hemoglobin

17. In case of enterobiasis acrihine - the structural analogue of vitamin D2 - is administered. The synthesis disorder of which enzymes does this medicine cause in microorganisms?
a. Cytochromeoxidases
b. NAD-dependet dehydrogenases
c. Aminotransferases
*d. FAD-dependent dehydrogenases
e. Peptidases

18. A 10-year-old girl often experiences acute respiratory infections with multiple spotty haemorrages in the places of clothes friction. Hypovitaminosis of what vitamin is present at the girl?
*a. С
b. В1
c. В2
d. А
e. В6

19. Hydroxylation of endogenous substrates and xenobiotics requires a donor of protons. Which of the following vitamins can play this role?
a. Vitamin P
b. Vitamin E
c. Vitamin A
*d. Vitamin C
e. Vitamin B6

20. The formation of a secondary mediator is obligatory in membrane-intracellular mechanism of hormone action. Point out the substance that is unable to be a secondary mediator:
a. Ca2+
*b. Glycerol
c. Inositol-3,4,5-triphosphate
d. Diacylglycerol
e. CAMP

21. A 4 y.o. child with signs of durative proteinic starvation was admitted to the hospital. The signs were as follows: growth inhibition, anemia, edemata, mental deficiency. Choose a cause of edemata development:
a. Reduced synthesis of glycoproteins
*b. Reduced synthesis of albumins
c. Reduced synthesis of hemoglobin
d. Reduced synthesis of globulins
e. Reduced synthesis of lipoproteins

22. Researchers isolated 5 isoenzymic forms of lactate dehydrogenase from the human blood serum and studied their properties. What property indicates that the isoenzymic forms were isolated from the same enzyme?
a. Tissue localization
b. The same electrophoretic mobility
c. The same molecular weight
d. The same physicochemical properties
*e. Catalyzation of the same reaction

23. On some diseases it is observed aldosteronism with hypertension and edema due to sodium retention in the organism. What organ of the internal secretion is affected on aldosteronism?
a. Ovaries
b. Testicle
*c. Adrenal glands
d. Pancreas
e. Hypophysis

24. An experiment proved that UV-radiated cells of patients with xeroderma pigmentosum restore the native DNA structure slower than cells of healthy individuals as a result of reparation enzyme defection. What enzyme helps this process?
a. DNA gyirase
*b. Endonuclease
c. Primase
d. RNA ligase
e. DNA polymerase III

25. A patient with suspicion on epidemic typhus was admitted to the hospital. Some arachnids and insects have been found in his flat. Which of them may be a carrier of the pathogen of epidemic typhus?
*a. Lice
b. Bed-bugs
c. Houseflies
d. Cockroaches
e. Spiders

26. A businessman came to India from South America. On examination the physician found that the patient was suffering from sleeping-sickness. What was the way of invasion?
a. With contaminated fruits and vegetables
b. As a result of mosquitos bites
*c. As a result of bugs bites
d. Through dirty hands
e. After contact with a sick dogs

27. Tere is observed inhibited fibrillation in the patients with bile ducts obstruction, bleeding due to low level of absorbtion of some vitamin. What vitamin is in deficit?
a. Е
b. Carotene
c. А
d. D
*e. К

28. A 52 year-old patient with bronchial asthma was treated with glucocorticoids. Fever reaction appeared as a result of postinjective abscess. The patient had subfebrile temperature, which didn’t correspond to latitude and severity of inflammatory process. Why did patient have low fever reaction?
a. Violation of heat-producing mechanisms
b. Thermoregulation center inhibition
c. Violation of heat loss through lungs
d. Inflammatory barrier formation in injection place
*e. Inhibited endogen pyrogens production

29. A 35-year-old man under the treatment for pulmonary tuberculosis has acute-onset of right big toe pain, swelling, and low-grade fever. The gouty arthritis was diagnosed and high serum uric acid level was found. Which of the following antituberculosis drugs are known for causing high uric acid levels?
a. Aminosalicylic acid
*b. Pyrazinamide
c. Thiacetazone
d. Cycloserine
e. Rifampicin

30. During metabolic process active forms of the oxygen including superoxide anion radical are formed in the human body. With help of what enzyme is this anion activated?
a. Glutathionereductase
*b. Superoxide dismutase
c. Peroxidase
d. Catalase
e. Glutathioneperoxidase

31. A patient presents high activity of LDH1,2, aspartate aminotransferase, creatine phosphokinase. In what organ (organs) is the development of a pathological process the most probable?
a. In connective tissue
b. In liver and kidneys
c. In skeletal muscles (dystrophy, atrophy)
d. In kidneys and adrenals
*e. In the heart muscle (initial stage of myocardium infarction)

32. Buffer capacity of blood was decreased in the worker due to exhausting muscular work. Entry of what acid substance to the blood can this state be explained?
a. 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate
b. Pyruvate
*c. Lactate
d. α-ketoglutarate
e. 3-phosphoglycerate

33. While examining the child the doctor revealed symmetric cheeks roughness, diarrhea, disfunction of the nervous system. Lack of what food components caused it?
a. Threonine, pantothenic acid
b. Lysine, ascorbic acid
*c. Nicotinic acid, tryptophane
d. Methionine, lipoic acid
e. Phenylalanine, pangamic acid

34. A13-year-old boy complains of general weakness, dizziness, tiredness. He is mentally retarded. Increased level of valine, isoleucine, leucine is in the blood and urine. Urine has specific smell. What is the diagnosis?
a. Addisons disease
b. Histidinemia
c. Graves disease
*d. Maple syrup urine disease
e. Tyrosinosis

35. Increased breaking of vessels, enamel and dentine destruction in scurvy patients are caused by disorder of collagen maturing. What stage of modification of procollagen is disordered in this avitaminosis?
a. Detaching of N-ended peptide
*b. Hydroxylation of proline
c. Glycosylation of hydroxylysine residues
d. Formation of polypeptide chains
e. Removal of C-ended peptide from procollagen

36. A 62-year-old female patient has developed a cataract (lenticular opacity) secondary to the diabetes mellitus. What type of protein modification is observed in case of diabetic cataract?
a. ADP-ribosylation
b. Phosphorylation
*c. Glycosylation
d. Methylation
e. Limited proteolysis

37. Aspirin has antiinflammatory effect due to inhibition of the cyclooxygenase activity. Level of what biological active acids will decrease?
a. Biogenic amines
b. Iodinethyronyns
c. Leucotriens
d. Catecholamines
*e. Prostaglandins

38. At the aboratory experiment the eukocyte culture was mixed with staphylococci. Neutrophile leukocytes engulfed and digested bacterial cells. This processes are termed:
a. Osmosis
*b. Phagocytosis
c. Diffusion
d. Pinocytosis
e. Facilitated diffusion

39. Examination of a patient revealed typical presentations of collagenosis. This pathology is characterized by increase of the following urine index:
a. Mineral salts
b. Ammonium salts
c. Arginine
d. Glucose
*e. Hydroxyproline

40. Marked increase of activity of МВ-forms of CPK (creatinephosphokinase) and LDH-1 were revealed on the examination of the patients blood. What is the most likely pathology?
*a. Miocardial infarction
b. Rheumatism
c. Cholecystitis
d. Pancreatitis
e. Hepatitis

41. Untrained people often have muscle pain after sprints as a result of lactate accumulation. This might be caused by intensification of the following biochemical process:
a. Lipogenesis
b. Glycogenesis
c. Gluconeogenesis
d. Pentose phosphate pathway
*e. Glycolysis

42. A 16-year-old boy was performed an appendectomy. He has been hospitalized for right lower quadrant abdominal pain within 18 hours. The surgical specimen is edematous and erythematous. Infiltration by what of the following cells is the most typical for the process occuring here?
a. Limphocytes
b. Monocytes
c. Eosinophils
d. Basophils
*e. Neutrophils

43. ATP synthesis is totaly blocked in a cell. How will the value of membrane rest potential change?
*a. It will disappear
b. It will be considerably increased
c. First it will decrease, then increase
d. First it will increase, then decrease
e. It will be slightly increased

44. The concentration of albumins in human blood sample is lower than normal. This leads to edema of tissues. What blood function is damaged?
*a. Maintaining the oncotic blood pressure
b. Maintaining the body temperature
c. All answers are correct
d. Maintaining the blood sedimentation system
e. Maintaining the Ph level

45. Examination of a patient suffering from frequent haemorrhages in the inner organs and mucous membranes revealed proline and lysine being included in collagen fibers. Impairment of their hydroxylation is caused by lack of the following vitamin:
*a. C
b. K
c. D
d. A
e. E

46. A 20 year old patient complains of general weakness, dizziness, quick fatigability. Blood analysis results: Hb- 80 g/l. Microscopical examination results: erythrocytes are of modified form. This condition might be caused by:
a. Addisons disease
*b. Sickle-cell anemia
c. Acute intermittent porphyria
d. Hepatocellular jaundice
e. Obturative jaundice

47. A 48 year old patient complained about intense pain, slight swelling and reddening of skin over the joints, temperature rise up to 38oC. Blood analysis revealed high concentration of urates. This condition might be caused by disturbed metabolism of:
a. Carbohydrates
*b. Purines
c. Cholesterol
d. Collagen
e. Pyrimidines

48. A patient has yellow skin colour, dark urine, dark-yellow feces. What substance will have strengthened concentration in the blood serum?
a. Verdoglobin
b. Biliverdin
c. Conjugated bilirubin
d. Mesobilirubin
*e. Unconjugated bilirubin

49. A patient has an increased pyruvate concentration in blood. A large amount of it is excreted with the urine. What vitamin is lacking in this patient?
*a. B1
b. B3
c. B2
d. B6
e. E

50. Ammonia is a very toxic substance, especially for nervous system. What substance takes the most active part in ammonia detoxication in brain tissues?
a. Histidine
b. Alanine
c. Lysine
d. Proline
*e. Glutamic acid

51. A patient has pellagra. Interrogation revealed that he had lived mostly on maize for a long time and eaten little meat. This disease had been caused by the deficit of the following substance in the maize:
a. Alanine
b. Histidine
c. Tyrosine
d. Proline
*e. Tryptophan

52. Increased production of thyroidal hormones T3 and T4, weight loss, tachycardia, psychic excitement and so on present on thyrotoxicosis. How do thyroidal hormones effect energy metabolism in the mitochondrion of cells?
a. Stops respiratory chain
b. Activates oxidated phosphorylation
c. Activates phosphorylation of substance
d. Stops phosphorylation of substance
*e. Disconnect oxidation and oxidated phosphorylation

53. A patient with high rate of obesity was advised to use carnitine as a food additive in order to enhance "fat burning". What is the role of carnitine in the process of fat oxidation?
a. Transport of FFA from fat depots to the tissues
b. FFA activation
c. Activation of intracellular lipolysis
*d. Transport of FFA (free fatty acids) from cytosol to the mitochondria
e. It takes part in one of reactions of FFA beta-oxidation

54. An experimental animal that was kept on protein-free diet developed fatty liver infiltration, in particular as a result of deficiency of methylating agents. This is caused by disturbed generation of the following metabolite:
a. DOPA
b. Acetoacetate
c. Linoleic acid
*d. Choline
e. Cholesterol

55. A patient consulted a doctor about symmetric dermatitis of open skin areas. It was found out that the patient lived mostly on cereals and ate too little meat, milk and eggs. What vitamin deficiency is the most evident?
a. Tocopherol
*b. Nicotinamide
c. Folic acid
d. Calciferol
e. Biotin

56. A 46 year old woman suffering from chololithiasis developed jaundice. Her urine became dark-yellow and feces became colourless. Blood serum will have the highest concentration of the following substance:
a. Unconjugated bilirubin
b. Mesobilirubin
c. Urobilinogen
*d. Conjugated bilirubin
e. Biliverdin

57. A 46 year old patient applied to a doctor complaining about joint pain that becomes stronger the day before weather changes. Blood examination revealed strengthened concentration of uric acid. The most probable cause of the disease is the intensified disintegration of the following substance:
a. Uridine triphosphate
b. Cytidine monophosphate
*c. Adenosine monophosphate
d. Uridine monophosphate
e. Thymidine monophosphate

58. A 42-year man suffering from gout has increased level of urinary acid in the blood. Allopurinol was prescribed to decrease the level of urinary acid. Competitive inhibitor of what enzyme is allopurinol?
a. Hypoxantinphosphoribosiltransferase
b. Guaninedeaminase
c. Adenosinedeaminase
d. Adeninephosphoribosiltransferase
*e. Xanthinoxidase

59. A 38 year old patient suffers from rheumatism in its active phase. What laboratory characteristic of blood serum is of diagnostic importance in case of this pathology?
a. Uric acid
b. Creatinine
c. Transferrin
*d. C-reactive protein
e. Urea

60. Patient experienced increased susceptibility of the skin to the sunlight. His urine after some time became dark-red. What is the most likely cause of this?
a. Alkaptonuria
*b. Porphyria
c. Albinism
d. Hemolytic jaundice
e. Pellagra

61. A patient with serious damage of muscular tissue was admitted to the traumatological department. What biochemical urine index will be increased in this case?
a. Common lipids
b. Mineral salts
c. Uric acid
*d. Creatinine
e. Glucose

62. 12 hours after an accute attack of retrosternal pain a patient presented a jump of aspartate aminotransferase activity in blood serum. What pathology is this deviation typical for?
a. Diabetes insipidus
*b. Myocardium infarction
c. Collagenosis
d. Viral hepatitis
e. Diabetes mellitus

63. Donor skin transplantation was performed to a patient with extensive burns. On the 8-th day the graft became swollen and changed colour; on the 11-th day graft rejection started. What cells take part in this process?
a. Basophils
b. Erythrocytes
*c. T-lymphocytes
d. Eosinophils
e. B-lymphocytes

64. A 30 y.o. woman had been ill for a year when she felt pain in the area of joints for the first time, they got swollen and skin above them became reddened. Provisional diagnosis is rheumatoid arthritis. One of the most probable causes of this disease is a structure alteration of a connective tissue protein:
*a. Collagen
b. Myosin
c. Troponin
d. Ovoalbumin
e. Mucin

65. Autopsy of a 12-year-old girl revealed: multiple cutaneous hemmorhages (mostly into the skin of buttocks, lower extremities), serous and mucous memrane hemmorhages, cerebral hemmorhages. Adrenal glands show focal necrosis and massive hemmorhages; kidneys show necrotic nephrosis, suppurative arthritis, iridocyclitis, vasculitis. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Radiation sickness
*b. Meningococcemia
c. Periarteritis nodosa
d. Epidemic typhus
e. Systemic lupus erythematosus

66. Examination of a 27-year-old patient revealed pathological changes in liver and brain. Blood plasma analysis revealed an abrupt decrease in the copper concentration, urine analysis revealed an increased copper concentration. The patient was diagnosed with Wilson’s degeneration. To confirm the diagnosis it is necessary to study the activity of the following enzyme in blood serum:
a. Carbonic anhydrase
b. Leucine aminopeptidase
c. Alcohol dehydrogenase
*d. Ceruloplasmin
e. Xanthine oxidase

67. A patient complains about dyspnea provoked by the physical activity. Clinical examination revealed anaemia and presence of the paraprotein in the zone of gamma-globulins. To confirm the myeloma diagnosis it is necessary to determine the following index in the patient’s urine:
a. Bilirubin
b. Ceruloplasmin
c. Antitrypsin
*d. Bence Jones protein
e. Haemoglobin

68. As a result of exhausting muscular work a worker has largely reduced buffer capacity of blood. What acidic substance that came to blood caused this phenomenon?
a. -
*b. Lactate
c. 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate
d. Pyruvate
e. 3-phosphoglycerate

69. A 2-year-old child with mental and physical retardation has been delivered to a hospital. He presents with frequent vomiting after having meals. There is phenylpyruvic acid in urine. Which metabolism abnormality is the reason for this pathology?
a. Lipidic metabolism
b. Water-salt metabolism
c. Phosphoric calcium metabolism
*d. Amino-acid metabolism
e. Carbohydrate metabolism

70. A patient was delivered to the hospital by an emergency team. Objectively: grave condition, unconscious, adynamy. Cutaneous surfaces are dry, eyes are sunken, face is cyanotic. There is tachycardia and smell of acetone from the mouth. Analysis results: blood glucose - 20,1 micromole/l (standard is 3,3-5,5 micromole/l), urine glucose - 3,5% (standard is - 0). What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Hyperglycemic coma
b. Acute heart failure
c. Anaphylactic shock
d. Acute alcoholic intoxication
e. Hypoglycemic coma

71. Profuse foam appeared when dentist put hydrogen peroxide on the mucous of the oral cavity. What enzyme caused such activity?
a. Glucose-6-phosphatdehydrogenase
b. Methemoglobinreductase
c. Cholinesterase
d. Acetyltransferase
*e. Catalase

72. A 62 y.o. woman complains of frequent pains in the area of her chest and backbone, rib fractures. A doctor assumed myelomatosis (plasmocytoma). What of the following laboratory characteristics will be of the greatest diagnostical importance?
a. Hyperalbuminemia
b. Hypoglobulinemia
c. Hypoproteinemia
*d. Paraproteinemia
e. Proteinuria

73. A newborn child has convulsions that have been observed after prescription of vitamin B6. This most probable cause of this effect is that vitamin B6 is a componet of the following enzyme:
*a. Glutamate decarboxylase
b. Netoglubarate dehydromine
c. Glycogen phosphorylase
d. Aminolevulinate synthase
e. Pyruvate dehydrostase

74. Nappies of a newborn have dark spots that witness of formation of homogentisic acid. Metabolic imbalance of which substance is it connected with?
a. Cholesterine
b. Tryptophane
c. Galactose
d. Methionine
*e. Thyrosine

75. Pathological changes of the liver and brain were revealed in a 27-year-old patient.The copper concentration is abruptly decreased in blood plasma and increased in the urine. Wilsons disease was diagnosed. Activity of what enzyme in the blood serum should be examined to prove diagnisis?
a. Xanthioxidase
b. Carboanhydraze
*c. Ceruloplasmin
d. Leucinamineopeptidaze
e. Alcoholdehydrogenaze

76. A 50-year-old patient complains about general weakness, appetite loss and cardiac arrhythmia. The patient presents with muscle hypotonia, flaccid paralyses, weakened peristaltic activity of the bowels. Such condition might be caused by:
a. Hyponatremia
*b. Hypokaliemia
c. Hyperkaliemia
d. Hypoproteinemia
e. Hypophosphatemia

77. An 18-year-old patient has enlarged inguinal lymphnodes, they are painless, thickened on palpation. In the area of genital mucous membrane there is a small-sized ulcer with thickened edges and "laquer" bottom of greyish colour. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Trophic ulcer
b. Gonorrhea
c. Tuberculosis
d. Lepra
*e. Syphilis

78. Concentration of pyruvate is increased in the patients blood, the most of which is excreted with urine. What avitaminosis is observed in the patient?
*a. Avitaminosis В1
b. Avitaminosis В3
c. Avitaminosis В2
d. Avitaminosis B6
e. Avitaminosis E

79. Carnitine including drug was recomended to the sportsman for improving results. What process is activated most of all with help of carnitine?
a. Synthesis of lipids
b. Tissue respiration
c. Synthesis of steroid hormones
d. Synthesis of ketone bodies
*e. Transport of fatty acids to the mitochondria

80. A patient with suspected diphtheria went through bacterioscopic examination. Examination of throat swab revealed rod-shaped bacteria with volutin granules. What etiotropic preparation should be chosen in this case?
a. Bacteriophage
b. Eubiotic
c. Interferon
*d. Antidiphtheric antitoxic serum
e. Diphtheria antitoxin

81. Patient with diabetes mellitus experienced loss of consciousness and convulsions after injection of insulin. What is the result of biochemical blood analysis for concentration of the sugar?
a. 8,0 mmol/L
b. 3,3 mmol/L
c. 5,5 mmol/L
*d. 1,5 mmol/L
e. 10,0 mmol/L

82. A woman who has been keeping to a clean-rice diet for a long time was diagnosed with polyneuritis (beriberi). What vitamin deficit results in development of this disease?
a. Ascorbic acid
b. Folic acid
c. Riboflavin
*d. Thiamine
e. Pyridoxine

83. Removal of gall bladder of a patient has disturbed processes of Ca absorption through the intestinal wall. What vitamin will stimulate this process?
a. PP
b. B12
c. K
*d. D3
e. C

84. A 63-year-old woman developed signs of rheumatoid arthritis. Increase of which indicated blood values level could be helpful in proving diagnosis?
a. Lipoproteids
b. General cholesterol
c. R-glycosidase
*d. Additive glycosaminoglycans
e. Acid phosphatase

85. A 1,5-year-old child presents with both mental and physical lag, decolorizing of skin and hair, decrease in catecholamine concentration in blood. When a few drops of 5% solution of trichloroacetic iron had been added to the child’s urine it turned olive green. Such alteration are typical for the following pathology of the amino acid metabolism:
a. Tyrosinosis
b. Alkaptonuria
*c. Phenylketonuria
d. Albinism
e. Xanthinuria

86. A patient complains of frequent diarrheas, especially after consumption of fattening food, and of body weight loss. Laboratory examination revealed steatorrhea; hypocholic feces. What can be the cause of this condition?
a. Lack of pancreatic phospholipase
b. Unbalanced diet
c. Mucous membrane inflammation of small intestine
d. Lack of pancreatic lipase
*e. Obturation of biliary tracts

87. On the empty stomach in the patients blood glucose level was 5,65 mmol/L, in an hour after usage of sugar it was 8,55 mmol/L, in a 2 hours - 4,95 mmol/L. Such indicators are typical for:
a. Patient with tireotoxicosis
*b. Healthy person
c. Patient with insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus
d. Patient with hidden diabetes mellitus
e. Patient with non-insulin dependent diabetes mellitus

88. A child is languid, apathetic. Liver is enlarged and liver biopsy revealed a significant excess of glycogene. Glucose concentration in the blood stream is below normal. What is the cause of low glucose concentration?
*a. Low (absent) activity of glycogene phosphorylase in liver
b. High activity of glycogen synthetase
c. Deficit of a gene that is responsible for synthesis of glucose 1-phosphaturidine transferase
d. Low (absent) activity of glucose 6-phosphatase
e. Low (absent) activity of hexokinase

89. A 65 year old man suffering from gout complains of kidney pain. Ultrasound examination revealed renal calculi. The most probable cause of calculi formation is the strengthened concentration of the following substance:
a. Bilirubin
b. Cholesterol
*c. Uric acid
d. Urea
e. Cystine

90. A 65-year-old suffering from the gout man complains of the pain in the kidneys region. On ultrasonic examination the renal calculi were revealed. As a result of what process were they formed?
a. Ornithine cycle
b. Protein catabolism
*c. Decay of purine nucleotides
d. Heme decay
e. Restoration of cysteine

91. A 5-year-old child who often fells ill with respiratory diseases has eczematous appearances after consumption of some food products, tendency to prolonged course of inflammatory processes. What kind of diathesis can be suspected in this case?
a. Hemmorhagic
b. Lymphohypoplastic
c. Asthenic
*d. Exudative-catharral
e. Arthritism

92. The greater amount of nitrogen is excreted from the organism in form of urea. Inhibition of urea synthesis and accumulation of ammonia in blood and tissues are induced by the decreased activity of the following liver enzyme:
*a. Carbamoyl phosphate synthetase
b. Urease
c. Pepsin
d. Amylase
e. Aspartate aminotransferase

93. A 35 y.o. patient who often consumes alcohol was treated with diuretics. There appeared serious muscle and heart weakness, vomiting, diarrhea, AP- 100/60 mm Hg, depression. This condition is caused by intensified excretion with urine of:
a. Sodium
b. Calcium
c. Phosphates
*d. Potassium
e. Chlorine

94. After intake of rich food a patient feels nausea and sluggishness; with time there appeared signs of steatorrhea. Blood cholesterine concentration is 9,2 micromole/l. This condition was caused by lack of:
a. Phospholipids
b. Chylomicrons
c. Triglycerides
d. Fatty acids
*e. Bile acids

95. Examination of a man who hadnt been consuming fats but had been getting enough carbohydrates and proteins for a long time revealed dermatitis, poor wound healing, vision impairment. What is the probable cause of metabolic disorder?
a. Lack of oleic acid
*b. Lack of linoleic acid, vitamins A, D, E, K
c. Lack of vitamins PP, H
d. Lack of palmitic acid
e. Low caloric value of diet

96. A 44-year-old woman complains of common weakness, heart pain, considerable increase of body weigt. Objectively: moon-like face, hirsutism, AP- 165/100 mm Hg, height - 164 cm, weight - 103 kg; fat is mostly accumulated in the region of neck, upper shoulder girdle, stomach. What is the main pathogenetic mechanism of obesity?
a. Decreased production of glucagon
b. Increased production of mineralocorticoids
c. Decreased production of thyroidal hormones
d. Increased production of insulin
*e. Increased production of glucocorticoids

97. An experimental animal has been given excessive amount of carbon-labeled glucose for a week. What compound can the label be found in?
a. Choline
b. Arachidonic acid
c. Methionine
d. Vitamin A
*e. Palmitic acid

98. After a serious viral infection a 3-year-old child has repeated vomiting, loss of consciousness, convulsions. Examination revealed hyperammoniemia. What may have caused changes of biochemical blood indices of this child?
a. Increased purtefaction of proteins in intestines
b. Inhibited activity of transamination enzymes
c. Activated processes of aminoacids decarboxylation
d. Disorder of biogenic amines neutralization
*e. Disorder of ammonia neutralization in ornithinic cycle

99. Examination of a patient with frequent hemorrhages from internals and mucous membranes revealed proline and lysine being a part of collagene fibers. What vitamin absence caused disturbance of their hydroxylation?
a. Vitamin K
b. Thiamine
c. Vitamin E
*d. Vitamin C
e. Vitamin A

100. A 36-year-old female patient has a history of collagen disease. Urine analysis is likely to reveal an increased concentration of the following metabolite:
a. Urea
b. Urobilinogen
c. Indican
d. Creatinine
*e. Oxyproline

101. Albinos cant stand sun impact - they dont aquire sun-tan but get sunburns. Disturbed metabolism of what aminoacid underlies this phenomenon?
a. Tryptophan
b. Methionine
*c. Phenilalanine
d. Glutamic acid
e. Histidine

102. A patient with continious bronchopneumonia was admitted to the therapeutic department. Antibiotic therapy didnt give much effect. What medication for improvement of immune state should be added to the complex treatment of this patient?
a. Sulfocamphocaine
b. Analgin
*c. Timaline
d. Benadryl
e. Paracetamol

103. A patient suffers from hepatic cirrhosis. Examination of which of the following substances excreted by urine can characterize the state of antitoxic function of liver?
a. Uric acid
b. Aminoacids
c. Ammonium salts
d. Kreatinine
*e. Hippuric acid

104. Vitamin A together with specific cytoreceptors penetrates through the nuclear membranes, induces transcription processes that stimulate growth and differentiation of cells. This biological function is realized by the following form of vitamin A:
a. Retinol
b. Carotin
c. Trans-retinal
d. Cis-retinal
*e. Trans-retinoic acid

105. Products of some proteins hydrolysis and modification are the biologically active substances called hormones. Lipotropin, corticotropin, melanotropin and endorphins are synthesized in the hypophysis of the following protein:
a. Neuroglobulin
b. Thyreoglobulin
c. Neuroalbumin
d. Neurostromin
*e. Proopiomelanocortin (POMC)

106. In patients with the biliary tract obstruction the blood coagulation is inhibited; the patients have frequent haemorrhages caused by the subnormal assimilation of the following vitamin:
a. D
b. A
*c. K
d. E
e. C

107. The study of the genealogy of a family with hypertrichosis (helix excessive pilosis) has demonstrated that this symptom is manifested in all generations only in men and is inherited by son from his father. What is the type of hypertrichosis inheritance?
a. Autosome-recessive
b. X-linked recessive chromosome
c. X-linked dominant chromosome
*d. Y-linked chromosome
e. Autosome-dominant

108. A newborn child suffers from milk curdling in stomach, this means that soluble milk proteins (caseins) transform to insoluble proteins (paracaseins) by means of calcium ions and a certain enzyme. What enzyme takes part in this process?
a. Pepsin
b. Secretin
c. Lipase
*d. Renin
e. Gastrin

109. The penetration of the irritable cell membrane for potassium ions has been increased during an experiment. What changes of membrane electric status can occur?
a. Action potential
b. Depolarization
*c. Hyperpolarization
d. Local response
e. No changes

110. A sportsman was recommended to take a medication that contains carnitine in order to improve his results. What process is activated by carnitine the most?
a. Tissue respiration
*b. Fatty acids transport to mitochondrions
c. Synthesis of ketone bodies
d. Synthesis of steroid hormones
e. Synyhesis of lipids

111. To prevent postoperative bleeding a 6 y.o. child was administered vicasol that is a synthetic analogue of vitamin K. Name post-translational changes of blood coagulation factors that will be activated by vicasol:
a. Phosphorylation of serine radicals
b. Polymerization
c. Glycosylation
*d. Carboxylation of glutamin acid
e. Partial proteolysis

112. A 4 y.o. boy has had recently serious viral hepatitis. Now there are such clinical presentations as vomiting, loss of consciousness, convulsions. Blood analysis revealed hyperammoniemia. Disturbunce of which biochemical process caused such pathological condition of the patient?
a. Increased putrefaction of proteins in bowels
b. Disturbed neutralization of biogenic amines
*c. Disturbed neutralization of ammonia in liver
d. Activation of aminoacid decarboxylation
e. Inhibition of transamination enzyms

113. During examination of an 11-month-old infant a pediatrician revealed osteoectasia of the lower extremities and delayed mineralization of cranial bones. Such pathology is usually provoked by the deficit of the following vitamin:
a. Riboflavin
*b. Cholecalciferol
c. Pantothenic acid
d. Thiamin
e. Bioflavonoids

114. Examination of a patient suffering from chronic hepatitis revealed a significant decrease in the synthesis and secretion of bile acids. What process will be mainly disturbed in the patient’s bowels?
a. Carbohydrate digestion
b. Protein digestion
*c. Fat emulsification
d. Glycerin absorption
e. Amino acid absorption

115. The energy inputs of a healthy man have been measured. In what position was the patient if his energy inputs were less than the main exchange?
a. Calmness
*b. Sleep
c. Easy work
d. Rest
e. Nervous exertion

116. Glutamate decarboxylation results in formation of inhibitory transmitter in CNS. Name it:
a. Asparagine
*b. GABA
c. Histamine
d. Glutathione
e. Serotonin

117. In course of histidine catabolism a biogenic amin is formed that has powerful vasodilatating effect. Name it:
a. Noradrenalin
b. Dopamine
c. Serotonin
d. Dioxyphenylalanine
*e. Histamine

118. Utilization of arachidonic acid via cyclooxigenase pathway results in formation of some bioactive substances. Name them:
*a. Prostaglandins
b. Biogenic amins
c. Insulin-like growth factors
d. Somatomedins
e. Thyroxine

119. After a sprint an untrained person develops muscle hypoxia. This leads to the accumulation of the following metabolite in muscles:
a. Oxaloacetate
*b. Lactate
c. Acetyl CoA
d. Ketone bodies
e. Glucose 6-phosphate

120. Myocyte cytoplasm contains a big number of dissolved metabolites of glucose oxidation. Name one of them that turns directly into a lactate:
a. Glucose 6-phosphate
b. Fructose 6-phosphate
c. Oxaloacetate
d. Glycerophosphate
*e. Pyruvate

121. Emotional stress causes activation of hormon-sensitive triglyceride lipase in the adipocytes. What secondary mediator takes part in this process?
a. Diacylglycerol
b. Ions of Са2+
c. Cyclic guanosine monophosphate
d. Adenosine monophosphate
*e. Cyclic adenosine monophosphate

122. A patient has been diagnosed with alkaptonuria. Choose an enzyme whose deficiency can be the reason for this pathology:
a. Phenylalanine hydroxylase
b. Pyruvate dehydrogenase
c. Dioxyphenylalanine decarboxylase
*d. Homogentisic acid oxidase
e. Glutamate dehydrogenase

123. A patient diagnosed with carcinoid of bowels was admitted to the hospital. Analysis revealed high production of serotonin. It is known that this substance is formed of tryptophane aminooacid. What biochemical mechanism underlies this process?
a. Transamination
b. Formation of paired compounds
c. Desamination
d. Microsomal oxydation
*e. Decarboxylation

124. A genetics specialist analyzed the genealogy of a family and found that both males and females may have the illness, not across all the generations, and that healthy parents may have ill children. What is the type of illness inheritance?
*a. Autosomal recessive
b. X-linked dominant
c. Y-linked
d. X-linked recessive
e. Autosomal dominant

125. Analysis of amniotic fluid that was obtained as a result of amniocentesis (puncture of amniotic sac) revealed cells the nuclei of which contain sex chromatin (Barrs body). What can it be evidence of?
a. Trisomy
b. Polyploidy
c. Development of male fetus
d. Genetic disorders of fetus development
*e. Development of female fetus

126. Vitamin B1 deficiency results in disturbance of oxidative decarboxylation of ?-ketoglutaric acid. This will disturb synthesis of the following coenzyme:
a. Lipoic acid
b. Coenzyme A
c. Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD)
d. Flavine adenine dinucleotide (FAD)
*e. Thiamine pyrophosphate

127. A childs blood presents high content of galactose, glucose concentration is low. There are such presentations as cataract, mental deficiency, adipose degeneration of liver. What disease is it?
a. Lactosemia
b. Diabetes mellitus
*c. Galactosemia
d. Steroid diabetes
e. Fructosemia

128. According to clinical indications a patient was administered pyridoxal phosphate. What processes is this medication intended to correct?
a. Protein synthesis
*b. Transamination and decarboxylation of aminoacids
c. Desamination of purine nucleotide
d. Oxidative decarboxylation of ketonic acids
e. Synthesis of purine and pyrimidine bases

129. A 45 y.o. woman suffers from Cushings syndrome - steroid diabetes. Biochemical examination revealed: hyperglycemia, hypochloremia. Which of the under-mentioned processes is the first to be activated?
a. Glycogenolysis
b. Glucose transport to the cell
c. Glycolysis
*d. Gluconeogenesis
e. Glucose reabsorption

130. Autopsy of a 46-year-old man revealed multiple brown-and-green layers and hemmorhages on the mucous membrane of rectum and sigmoid colon; slime and some blood in colon lumen; histologically - fibrinous colitis. In course of bacteriological analysis of colon contents S.Sonne were found. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Yersiniosis
b. Crohns disease
c. Cholera
d. Salmonellosis
*e. Dysentery

131. A patient had been ill with bronchial asthma for many years and died from asthmatic fit. Histologic lung examination revealed: lumen of bronchioles and small bronches contain a lot of mucus with some eosinophils, there is sclerosis of alveolar septums, dilatation of alveole lumen. What mechanism of development of hypersensibility reaction took place?
a. Cytolysis determined by lymphocytes
b. Granulomatosis
c. Cytotoxic reaction
d. Immunocomplex reaction
*e. Reagin reaction

132. Desulfiram is widely used in medical practice to prevent alcocholism. It inhibits aldehyde dehydrogenase. Increased level of what metabolite causes aversion to alcochol?
a. Methanol
*b. Acetaldehyde
c. Malonyl aldehyde
d. Ethanol
e. Propionic aldehyde

133. A 1-year-old child with symptoms of muscle involvement was admitted to the hospital. Examination revealed carnitine deficiency in his muscles. What process disturbance is the biochemical basis of this pathology?
a. Actin and myosin synthesis
*b. Transporting of fatty acids to mitochodrions
c. Substrate phosphorylation
d. Regulation of Ca2+ level in mitochondrions
e. Lactic acid utilization

134. The patient with complaints of permanent thirst applied to the doctor. Hyperglycemia, polyuria and increased concentration of 17-ketosteroids in the urine were revealed. What disease is the most likely?
a. Type I glycogenosis
b. Addisons disease
c. Insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus
d. Myxoedema
*e. Steroid diabetes

135. Index of pH of the blood changed and became 7,3 in the patient with diabetus mellitus. Detecting of the components of what buffer system is used while diagnosing disorder of the acid-base equilibrium?
a. Protein
*b. Bicarbonate
c. Hemoglobin
d. Phosphate
e. Oxyhemoglobin

136. As a result of posttranslative modifications some proteins taking part in blood coagulation, particularly prothrombin, become capable of calcium binding. The following vitamin takes part in this process:
a. B2
*b. K
c. A
d. C
e. B1

137. Objective examination of a patient revealed: slender figure, big skull, highly developed frontal region of face, short extremities. What constitutional type is it characteristic for?
a. Mixed
*b. Respiratory
c. Digestive
d. Muscular
e. Cerebral

138. A 38-year-old patient died during intractable attack of bronchial asthma. Histologic examination revealed mucus accumulation in bronchial lumen, a lot of fat cells (labrocytes) in the wall of bronches, many of them are in the state of degranulation, there are also a lot of eosinophils. What pathogenesis of bronchial changes is it?
*a. Atopy
b. Immunocomplex mechanism
c. Granulomatosis
d. Cellular cytolysis
e. Cytotoxic, cytolytic action of antibodies

139. Diabetes mellitus causes ketosis as a result of activated oxidation of fatty acids. What disorders of acid-base equilibrium may be caused by excessive accumulation of ketone bodies in blood?
a. Respiratory acidosis
b. Respiratory alcalosis
c. Metabolic alcalosis
d. Any changes wount happen
*e. Metabolic acidosis

140. A woman with 0 (I) bllod group has born a child with AB blood group. This womans husband has A blood group. What genetic interaction explains this phenomenon?
a. Codominance
b. Incomplete dominance
c. Complementation
*d. Recessive epistasis
e. Polymery

141. Depressions and emotional insanities result from the deficit of noradrenalin, serotonin and other biogenic amines in the brain. Their concentration in the synapses can be increased by means of the antidepressants that inhibit the following enzyme:
a. Phenylalanine-4-monooxygenase
*b. Monoamine oxidase
c. L-amino-acid oxidase
d. Diamine oxidase
e. D-amino-acid oxidase

142. A 3 year old child with symptoms of stomatitis, gingivitis and dermatitis of open skin areas was delivered to a hospital. Examination revealed inherited disturbance of neutral amino acid transporting in the bowels. These symptoms were caused by the deficiency of the following vitamin:
a. Vitamin A
b. Pantothenic acid
*c. Niacin
d. Cobalamin
e. Biotin

143. During hypersensitivity test a patient got subcutaneous injection of an antigen which caused reddening of skin, edema, pain as a result of histamine action. This biogenic amine is generated as a result of transformation of the following histidine amino acid:
*a. Decarboxylation
b. Phosphorylation
c. Deaminization
d. Isomerization
e. Methylation

144. A patient with suspected diagnosis "progressing muscular dystrophy" got his urine tested. What compound will confirm this diagnosis if found in urine?
a. Myoglobin
b. Calmodulin
c. Collagen
d. Porphyrin
*e. Kreatine

145. A patient complained about dizziness, memory impairment, periodical convulsions. It was revealed that these changes were caused by a product of decarboxylation of glutamic acid. Name this product:
a. TDP
b. Pyridoxal phosphate
*c. GABA
d. ATP
e. THFA

146. A sportsman needs to improve his sporting results. He was recommended to take a preparation that contains carnitine. What process is activated the most by this compound?
a. Vitamin K transporting
*b. Fatty acids transporting
c. Calcium ions transporting
d. Amino acids transporting
e. Glucose transporting

147. A doctor examined a child and revealed symptoms of rachitis. Development of this desease was caused by deficiency of the following compound:
a. Naphtaquinone
b. Retinol
c. Biotin
d. Tocopherol
*e. 1,25 [ОН]-dichydroxycholecalciferol

148. Laboratory examination of a child revealed increased concentration of leucine, valine, isoleucine and their ketoderivatives in blood and urine. Urine smelt of maple syrup. This disease is characterized by the deficit of the following enzyme:
a. Phosphofructokinase
b. Phosphofructomutase
c. Aminotransferase
d. Glucose-6-phosphatase
*e. Dehydrogenase of branched amino acids

149. A 9-month-old infant is fed with artificial formulas with unbalanced vitamin D6 concentration. The infant presents with pellagral dermatitis, convulsions, anaemia. Convulsion development might be caused by the disturbed formation of:
*a. GABA
b. Serotonin
c. Dopamine
d. DOPA
e. Histamine

150. It was found out that some compounds, for instance fungi toxins and some antibiotics can inhibit activity of RNA-polymerase. What process will be disturbed in a cell in case of inhibition of this enzyme?
*a. Transcription
b. Replication
c. Reparation
d. Translation
e. Processing

151. When blood circulation in the damaged tissue is restored, then lactate accumulation comes to a stop and glucose consumption decelerates. These metabolic changes are caused by activation of the following process:
a. Anaerobic glycolysis
b. Gluconeogenesis
c. Glycogen biosynthesis
*d. Aerobic glycolysis
e. Lipolysis

152. During starvation muscle proteins break up into free amino acids. These compounds will be the most probably involved into the following process:
*a. Gluconeogenesis in liver
b. Synthesis of higher fatty acids
c. Decarboxylation
d. Glycogenolysis
e. Gluconeogenesis in muscles

153. Surgical removal of a part of stomach resulted in disturbed absorption of vitamin B12, it is excreted with feces. The patient was diagnosed with anemia. What factor is necessary for absorption of this vitamin?
a. Hydrochloric acid
b. Gastrin
*c. Gastromucoprotein
d. Pepsin
e. Folic acid

154. A newborn develops dyspepsia after the milk feeding. When the milk is substituted by the glucose solution the dyspepsia symptoms disappear. The newborn has the subnormal activity of the following enzyme:
a. Isomaltase
*b. Lactase
c. Maltase
d. Invertase
e. Amylase

155. Patients who suffer from severe diabetes and dont receive insulin have metabolic acidosis. This is caused by increased concentration of the following metabolites:
a. Unsaturated fatty acids
b. Fatty acids
*c. Ketone bodies
d. Triacylglycerols
e. Cholesterol

156. A 4 year old child with hereditary renal lesion has signs of rickets, vitamin D concentration in blood is normal. What is the most probable cause of rickets development?
a. Increased excretion of calcium
b. Hypofunction of parathyroid glands
c. Lack of calcium in food
*d. Impaired synthesis of calcitriol
e. Hyperfunction of parathyroid glands

157. A 6 year old child was delivered to a hospital. Examination revealed that the child couldnt fix his eyes, didnt keep his eyes on toys, eye ground had the cherry-red spot sign. Laboratory analyses showed that brain, liver and spleen had high rate of ganglioside glycometide. What congenital disease is the child ill with?
a. Niemann-Pick disease
b. MacArdle disease
c. Wilsons syndrome
d. Turners syndrome
*e. Tay-Sachs disease

158. In clinical practice tuberculosis is treated with izoniazid preparation - that is an antivitamin able to penetrate into the tuberculosis bacillus. Tuberculostatic effect is induced by the interference with replication processes and oxidation-reduction reactions due to the buildup of pseudo-coenzyme:
a. FMN
b. FAD
*c. NAD
d. TDP
e. CoQ

159. A newborn child was found to have reduced intensity of sucking, frequent vomiting, hypotonia. Urine and blood exhibit increased concentration of citrulline. What metabolic process is disturbed?
*a. Ornithinic cycle
b. Glycolysis
c. Cori cycle
d. Glyconeogenesis
e. Tricarboxylic acid cycle

160. A male patient has been diagnosed with acute radiation disease. Laboratory examination revealed a considerable reduction of platelet serotonin level. The likely cause of platelet serotonin reduction is the disturbed metabolism of the following substance:
a. Tyrosine
b. Phenylalanine
c. Serine
*d. 5-oxytryptofane
e. Histidine

161. Dietary intake of a 30 year old nursing woman contains 1000 mg of calcium, 1300 mg of phosphorus and 20 mg of iron per day. It is necessary to change content of these mineral substances in the following way:
a. To increase iron content
b. To reduce iron content
c. To increase calcium content
d. To reduce fluorine content
*e. To increase phosphorus content

162. Cardinal symptoms of primary hyperparathyroidism are osteoporosis and renal lesion along with development of urolithiasis. What substance makes up the basis of these calculi in this disease?
a. Bilirubin
b. Cholesterol
c. Uric acid
d. Cystine
*e. Calcium phosphate

163. Study of conversion of a food colouring agent revealed that neutralization of this xenobiotic takes place only in one phase - microsomal oxydation. Name a component of this phase:
*a. Cytochrome p-450
b. Cytochrome C
c. Cytochrome oxidase
d. Cytochrome A
e. Cytochrome B

164. A patient had hemorrhagic stroke. Blood examination revealed strengthened kinin concentration.The patient was prescribed contrical. It was administered in order to inhibit the following proteinase:
a. Pepsin
b. Chemotrypsin
c. Collagenase
*d. Kallikrein
e. Trypsin

165. A 49-year-old driver complains about unbearable constricting pain behind the breastbone irradiating to the neck. The pain arose 2 hours ago. Objectively: the patient’s condition is grave, he is pale, heart tones are decreased. Laboratory studies revealed high activity of creatine kinase and LDH1. What disease are these symptoms typical for?
a. Acute pancreatitis
b. Cholelithiasis
c. Diabetes mellitus
*d. Acute myocardial infarction
e. Stenocardia

166. Plasmic factors of blood coagulation are exposed to post-translational modification with the participation of vitamin K. It is necessary as a cofactor in the enzyme system of γ-carboxylation of protein factors of blood coagulation due to the increased affinity of their molecules with calcium ions. What amino acid is carboxylated in these proteins?
*a. Glutamic
b. Serine
c. Arginine
d. Phenylalanine
e. Valine

167. Pharmacological effects of antidepressants are connected with inhibition of an enzyme catalyzing biogenic amines noradrenaline and serotonine in the mitochondrions of cerebral neurons. What enzyme participates in this process?
*a. Monoamine oxidase
b. Decarboxylase
c. Lyase
d. Peptidase
e. Transaminase

168. An oncological patient was prescribed methotrexate. With the lapse of time target cells of the tumour lost susceptibility to this drug. There is change of gene expression of the folowing enzyme:
*a. Dehydrofolate reductase
b. Deaminase
c. Folate decarboxylase
d. Folate oxidase
e. Thiaminase

