1. A patient visited a dentist with complaints of redness and edema of his mouth mucous membrane in a month after dental prosthesis. The patient was diagnosed with allergic stomatitis. What type of allergic reaction by Gell and Cumbs underlies this disease?
a. Anaphylactic
b. Stimulating
c. Cytotoxic
d. Immunocomplex
*e. Delayed type hypersensitivity

2. An electronic microphotograph shows a macrophagic cell with erythrocytes at different stages of differentiation located along its processes. This is the cell of the following organ:
a. Lymph node
*b. Red bone marrow
c. Spleen
d. Thymus
e. Tonsil

3. Decreased blood supply to the organs causes hypoxia that activates fibroblasts function. Volume of what elements is increased in this case?
a. Vessels of microcircular stream
b. Parenchymatous elements of the organ
c. Lymphatic vessels
*d. Intercellular substance
e. Nerve elements

4. A patient has undergone an amputation of lower extremity. Some time later painful nodules appeared in a stump. Amputatious neuromas were found out at the microscopic examination. To what pathological processes do those formations relate?
a. Hyperemia
b. Metaplasia
c. Dystrophy
d. Inflammation
*e. Regeneration

5. A 22-year-old patient was admitted to the hospital with complaints of heavy nasal breathing. During the examination of her nasal cavity the doctors found thickened mucous membrane, a lot of mucus and nodular infiltrates without erosions in the nose.The nasal rhinoscleroma was diagnosed. The biopsy was taken. What typical morphological changes may be found?
a. Interstitial inflammation
*b. Granulomas with Mikulicz’s cells
c. Granulomas with Langhan’s cells
d. Granulomas with Virchow’s cells
e. Granulomas with foreign body cells

6. Lung of premature infant is presented on electronic photomicrography of biopsy material. Collapse of the alveolar wall caused by the deficiency of surfactant was revealed. Disfunction of what cells of the alveolar wall caused it?
*a. Alveocytes type II
b. Alveolar macrophages
c. Fibroblasts
d. Secretory cells
e. Alveocytes type I

7. During histological examination of the stomach it was found out that glands contain very small amount of pariental cells or they are totally absent. Mucose membrane of what part of the stomach was studied?
a. Body of stomach
b. -
c. Fundus of stomach
d. Cardiak part
*e. Pyloric part

8. Live vaccine is injected into the human body. Increasing activity of what cells of connective tissue can be expected?
a. Macrophages and fibroblasts
b. Adipocytes and adventitious cells
c. Fibroblasts and labrocytes
*d. Plasmocytes and lymphocytes
e. Pigmentocytes and pericytes

9. In the blood of a 26-year-old man it was revealed 18% of erythrocytes of the spherical, ball-shaped, flat and thorn-like shape. Other eritrocytes were in the form of the concavo-concave disks. How is such phenomenon called?
a. Pathological poikilocytosis
b. Pathological anisocytosis
c. Erytrocytosis
*d. Physiological poikilocytosis
e. Physiological anisocytosis

10. When the pH level of the stomach lumen decreases to less than 3, the antrum of the stomach releases peptide that acts in paracrine fashion to inhibit gastrin release. This peptide is:
a. Acetylcholine
b. Somatostatin
c. Vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP)
*d. GIF
e. Gastrin-releasing peptide (GRP)

11. A 50-year-old male farm worker has been brought to the emergency room. He was found confused in the orchard and since then has remained unconscious. His heart rate is 45 and his blood pressure is 80/40 mm Hg. He is sweating and salivating profusely. Which of the following should be prescribed?
a. Proserine
b. Norepinephrine
*c. Atropine
d. Physostigmine
e. Pentamine

12. A 13-year-old girl with history of asthma complained of cough, dyspnea and wheezing. Her symptoms became so severe that her parents brought her to the emergency room. Physical examination revealed diaphoresis, dyspnea, tachycardia and tachypnea. Her respiratory rate was 42/min, pulse rate was 110 beats per minute, and blood pressure was 130/70 mm Hg. Choose from the following list the most appropriate drug to reverse the bronchoconstriction rapidly:
a. Beclomethasone
b. Cromolyn
*c. Salbutamol
d. Methylprednidsolone
e. Ipratropium

13. A doctor administered Allopurinol to a 26-year-old young man with the symptoms of gout. What pharmacological action of Allopurinol ensures therapeutical effect?
*a. By inhibiting uric acid synthesis
b. By inhibiting leucocyte migration into the joint
c. By general analgetic effect
d. By general anti-inflammatory effect
e. By increasing uric acid excretion

14. The pulmonalis embolism has suddenly developed in a 40 year-old patient with opened fracture of the hip. Choose the possible kind of embolism
a. Foreign body
*b. Fat
c. Air
d. Thrombus-embolus
e. Tissue

15. Hypertrychosis of auricles is caused by a gene that is localized in Y-chromosome. Father has this feature. What is the probability to give birth to a boy with such anomaly?
a. 35%
b. 75%
c. 0%
d. 25%
*e. 100%

16. On autopsy a 35-year-old man the focus of carnification 5 cm in diametre enclosed in a thin capsule was revealed in the second segment of the right lung . The focus consists of a tough dry friable tissue with a dim surface. For what disease are these morphological changes typical?
*a. Tuberculoma
b. Chondroma
c. Postinflammatory pneumosclerosis
d. Tumorous form of silicosis
e. Lung cancer

17. In the microspecimen of red bone marrow there were revealed multiple capillares through the walls of which mature blood cells penetrated. What type of capillares is it?
a. Fenestrational
b. Visceral
c. Lymphatic
*d. Sinusoidal
e. Somatical

18. M-r S presents all signs of the hepatic coma: loss of consciousness, absence of reflexes, cramps, convulsion, disorder of heart activity, recurrent (periodical) respiration. What are cerebrotoxical substances which accumulate in blood under hepar insufficiency?
a. Autoantibody
b. IL-1
*c. Ammonia
d. Necrosogenic substances
e. Ketonic body

19. Autopsy of a man who died from chronic cardiacvascular collapse revealed "tiger heart". Sidewards of endocardium a yellowish-white banding can be seen; myocardium is dull, dark-yellow. What process caused this pathology?
a. Fatty vascular-stromal degeneration
b. Amyloidosis
c. Carbohydrate degeneration
d. Hyaline degeneration
*e. Fatty parenchymatous degeneration

20. The low specific gravity of the secondary urine (1002) was found out in the sick person. What is the most distant part of nephron where concentration of secondary urine takes place?
a. In the nephron’s glomerulus
b. In ascending part of loop of Henle
c. In distal tubule of nephron
*d. In the collecting duck
e. In proximal tubule of nephron

21. Blood sampling for bulk analysis is recommended to be performed on an empty stomack and in the morning. What changes in blood composition can occur if to perform blood sampling after food intake?
a. Reduced contents of thrombocytes
b. Reduced contents of erythrocytes
c. Increased contents of erythrocytes
d. Increased plasma proteins
*e. Increased contents of leukocytes

22. Most participants of Magellan expedition to America died from avitominosis. This disease declared itself by general weakness, subcutaneous hemmorhages, falling of teeth, gingival hemmorhages. What is the name of this avitiminosis?
a. Pellagra
b. Polyneuritis (beriberi)
c. Biermers anemia
*d. Scurvy
e. Rachitis

23. A histological specimen presents a receptor zone of a sensoepithelial sense organ. Cells of this zone are placed upon the basal membrane and include the following types: external and internal receptor cells, external and internal phalangeal cell, stem cells, external limiting cells and external supporting cell. The described receptor zone belongs to the following sense organ:
a. Equilibrium organ
b. Olfactory organ
c. Visual organ
d. Gustatory organ
*e. Acoustic organ

24. A patient died 3 days after the operation because of perforated colon with manifestations of diffuse purulent peritonitis. The autopsy revealed: colon mucos membrane was thickened and covered with a fibrin film, isolated ulcers penetrated at different depth. The histology result: mucous membrane necrosis, leukocytes infiltration with hemorrhages focuses. What disease complication caused the patients death?
a. Crohns disease
b. Amebiasis
c. Typhoid
d. Nonspecific ulcerative colitis
*e. Dysentery

25. A patient was admitted to the hospital with an asphyxia attack provoked by a spasm of smooth muscles of the respiratory tracts. This attack was mainly caused by alterations in the following parts of the airways:
*a. Small bronchi
b. Large bronchi
c. Respiratory part
d. Terminal bronchioles
e. Median bronchi

26. The increased intraocular tension is observed in the patient with glaucoma.Secretion of aqueous humor by the ciliar body is normal. Injury of what structure of the eyeball wall caused the disorder of flow-out from the anterior chamber?
a. Ciliary muscle
b. Back epithelium of cornea
c. Ciliar body
d. Choroid
*e. Venous sinus

27. Examination of a 43 y.o. patient revealed that his stomach has difficulties with digestion of protein food. Gastric juice analysis revealed low acidity. Function of which gastric cells is disturbed in this case?
*a. Parietal exocrinocytes
b. Mucous cells (mucocytes)
c. Cervical mucocytes
d. Endocrinous cells
e. Main exocrinocytes

28. A patient has been given high doses of hydrocortisone for a long time. This caused atrophy of one of the adrenal cortex zones. Which zone is it?
*a. Fascial
b. Reticular
c. -
d. Glomerular and reticular
e. Glomerular

29. Low level of albumins and fibrinogen was detected in the patients blood. Decreased activity of what organelle of the liver hepatocytes can cause it?
a. Agranular endoplasmatic net
b. Golgi complex
c. Lysosomes
*d. Granular endoplasmatic net
e. Mitochondrions

30. In a histological specimen parenchyma of an organ is represented by lymphoid tissue that forms lymph nodes; the latter are arranged in a diffuse manner and enclose a central artery. What anatomic formation has such morphological structure?
*a. Spleen
b. Lymph node
c. Red bone marrow
d. Thymus
e. Tonsil

31. A histological specimen of a kidney shows a part of the distal tubule going between the afferent and efferent arteriole. The cells building the tubule wall have dense nuclei; basal membrane is absent. Such structural formation is called:
a. -
*b. Macula densa
c. Mesangial cells
d. Juxtaglomerular cells
e. Juxtavascular cells

32. Patient with injured muscles of the lower extremities was admitted to the traumatological department. Due to what cells is reparative regeneration of the muscle fibers and restoration of the muscle function possible?
a. Myoblasts
b. Fibroblasts
c. Myoepithelial cells
*d. Satellite-cells
e. Myofibroblasts

33. In course of an experiment a big number of stem cells of red bone marrow was in some way destructed. Regeneration of which cell populations in the loose connective tissue will be inhibited?
*a. Of macrophags
b. Of pigment cells
c. Of pericytes
d. Of lipocytes
e. Of fibroblasts

34. Histological examination of a 40 y.o. mans thymus revealed decreased share of parenchymatous gland elements, increased share of adipose and loose connective tissue, its enrichment with thymus bodies. The organs mass was unchanged. What phenomenon is it?
a. Dystrophy
b. Atrophy
c. Accidental involution
d. Hypotrophy
*e. Age involution

35. A histological specimen shows a blood vessel. Its inner coat is composed by endothelium, subendothelium and internal elastic membrane. The middle coat is enriched with smooth myocytes. Such morphological characteristics are typical for the following vessel:
a. Non-muscular vein
b. Muscular-type vein
c. Elastic-type artery
d. Capillary
*e. Muscular-type artery

36. In course of indirect histogenesis of tubular bone tissue a plate is formed between epiphyseal and diaphyseal ossification centres that provides further lengthwise growth of bones. What structure is it?
a. Layer of interior general plates
*b. Metaphyseal plate
c. Osseous plate
d. Osseous cuff
e. Osteon

37. A 2-year-old child has got intestinal dysbacteriosis, which results in hemorrhagic syndrome. What is the most likely cause of hemorrhage of the child?
a. Activation of tissue thromboplastin
b. Fibrinogen deficiency
c. Hypocalcemia
*d. Vitamin K insufficiency
e. PP hypovitaminosis

38. Histological specimen presents a vessel the wall of which consists of endothelium, basal membrane and loose connective tissue. What type of vessel is it?
*a. Vein of non-muscular type
b. Vein of muscular type
c. Lymphocapillary
d. Hemocapillary
e. Artery

39. A patient died from acute cardiac insufficiency. The histological examination of his heart revealed the necrotized section in myocardium of the left ventricle, which was separated from undamaged tissue by the zone of hyperimic vessels, small hemorrhages and leukocytic infiltration. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Myocardial ischemic dystrophy
b. Diffuse exudate myocarditis
c. Productive myocarditis
*d. Myocardial infarction
e. Focal exudate myocarditis

40. Vitamin A deficit results in the impairment of twilight vision. Name the cells that have the above-mentioned photoreceptor function:
a. Horizontal neurocytes
b. Bipolar neurons
c. Ganglion neurocytes
*d. Rod receptor cell
e. Cone receptor cells

41. Kidneys of a man under examination show increased resorbtion of calcium ions and decreased resorbtion of phosphate ions. What hormone causes this phenomenon?
a. Thyrocalcitonin
b. Aldosterone
c. Vasopressin
*d. Parathormone
e. Hormonal form D3

42. During pubescence the cells of male sexual glands begin to produce male sex hormon testosterone that calls forth secondary sexual characters. What cells of male sexual glands produce this hormone?
*a. Leidig cells
b. Sertolis cells
c. Spermatozoa
d. Supporting cells
e. Sustentocytes

43. The specimens present sections of haemopoetic and immunogenetic organs. Organ has lymph tissue forming different structures (lymph nodes,lobules, bars). In what organ does antigen-independent proliferation and differantiation take place?
a. Hemolymph nodes
b. Tonsil
c. Lymphatic nodes
d. Spleen
*e. Thymus

44. A patient with thrombophlebitis of lower extremities had got chest pains, blood spitting, growing respiratory failure that caused his death. Autopsy revealed multiple pulmonary infarctions. What is the most probable reason of their development?
a. Bronchial artery thrombosis
b. Pulmonary artery thrombosis
*c. Pulmonary artery embolism
d. Bronchial artery embolism
e. Pulmonary venous thrombosis

45. A patient complains of dryness of head skin, itching, fragility and loss of hair. After examination he was diagnosed with seborrhea. Disturbed activity of which cells caused this condition?
a. Cells of sudoriferous glands
b. Adipocytes
c. Melanocytes
*d. Cells of sebaceous glands
e. Epithelial cells

46. A sensitive neural ganglion consists of roundish neurocytes with one extension that divides into axon and dendrite at some distance from the perikaryon. What are these cells called?
a. Bipolar
b. Unipolar
*c. Pseudounipolar
d. Multipolar
e. Apolar

47. An embryo displays disturbed process of dorsal mesoderm segmentation and somite formation. What part of skin will have developmental abnormalities?
*a. Derma
b. Sebaceous glands
c. Sudoriferous glands
d. Epidermis
e. Hair

48. An electron microphotography of a fragment of proper gastric gland shows a big irregular round-shaped cell. There are a lot of intracellular tubules and mitochondria in the cytoplasm. Specify this cell:
a. Mucous cell
b. Endocrine cell
c. Principal cell
d. Undifferentiated cell
*e. Parietal cell

49. A scheme presents an exocrinous gland that has unbranched excretory duct with a terminal part in form of a saccule openining into the duct. How is this gland called according to the morphological classification of exocrinous glands?
*a. Simple unbranched alveolar
b. Simple branched tubular
c. Compound unbranched alveolar tubular
d. Compound unbranched alveolar
e. Compound branched alveolar

50. Roentgenological examination of skull base bones revealed enlargement of sellar cavity, thinning of anterior clinoid processes, destruction of different parts, destruction of different parts of sella turcica. Such bone destruction might be caused by a tumour of the following wndocrinous gland:
a. Adrenal glands
b. Thyroid gland
c. Epiphysis
d. Thymus gland
*e. Hypophysis

51. Electronic microphotography of pulmonary alveoles wall presents a big cell. Its cytoplasm has a lot of mitochondria, developed Golgi apparatus, osmiophil lamellated corpuscles. What is the main function of this cell?
a. It purifies the air
b. It absorbs microorganisms
c. It is a component of blood-air barrier
d. It warms the air
*e. It produces surfactant

52. A pathological process in bronchi resulted in epithelium desquamation. What cells will regenerate bronchial epithelium?
a. Endocrinal
b. Goblet
c. Intercalary
d. Ciliate
*e. Basal

53. A viral infection has damaged cells that form walls of bile capillaries. This stimulated conditions for inflow of bile into the blood of sinusoidal capillaries. What cells are damaged?
a. Ito cells
b. Kupffers cells
*c. Hepatocytes
d. Pit-cells
e. Endotheliocytes

54. A histological specimen of spleen shows a vessel with a wall consisting of endothelium and subendothelial layer, median membrane is absent, exterior membrane inosculates with the layers of spleen connective tissue. What vessel is it?
*a. Vein of non-muscular type
b. Artery of muscular type
c. Capillary
d. Arteriole
e. Vein of muscular type

55. In course of a conditional experiment the development of mesenchyma cells was completely inhibited. Development of the following muscular tissue will be disturbed:
a. Skeletal muscular tissue
*b. Smooth muscular tissue
c. Epidermal muscular tissue
d. Neural muscular tissue
e. Cardiac muscular tissue

56. A patient ill with chronic gastritis went for endogastric pH-metry that allowed to reveal decreased acidity of gastric juice. It is indicative of diminished function of the following cells:
a. Cervical cells
b. Accessory cells
c. Chief exocrinocytes
d. Endocrinocytes
*e. Parietal exocrinocytes

57. Ultramicroscopical examination of "dark" hepatocyte population in the cell cytoplasm detected a developed granular endoplasmic reticulum. What function has this organella in these cells?
a. Carbohydrate synthesis
b. Bile production
c. Calcium ion depositing
*d. Synthesis of blood plasma proteins
e. Deintoxicative function

58. An endocrinal gland with parenchyma consisting of epithelium and neural tissue is under morphological examination. Epithelial trabecules have two types of cells: chromophilic and chromophobic. Identify this organ:
a. Hypothalamus
b. Adrenal glands
*c. Hypophysis
d. Thyroid gland
e. Parathyroid gland

59. A histological specimen presents an artery. One of the membranes of its wall has flat cells lying on the basal membrane. What type of cells is it?
a. Fibroblasts
b. Macrophages
c. Mesothelium
d. Smooth myocytes
*e. Endothelium

60. One of sections of central nervous system has layerwise arrangement of neurocytes. Among them there are cells of the following forms: stellate, fusiform, horizontal, pyramidal. What section of central nervous system is this structure typical for?
a. Cerebellum
b. Spinal cord
*c. Cortex of cerebrum
d. Medulla oblongata
e. Hypothalamus

61. Study of fingerprints (dactylography) is used by criminalists for personal identification as well as for diagnostics of genetic abnormalities, particularly Dawns disease. What layer of skin determines individuality of fingerprints?
a. Clear (stratum lucidum epidermidis)
b. Basal
c. Horny
d. Reticular
*e. Dermopapillary

62. A microspecimen of the submandibular salivary gland shows some basket-shaped cells concentrated around the acines and excretory ducts. These cells surround bases of the serous cells and are called myoepitheliocytes. These cells relate to the following tissue:
a. Loose fibrous connective tissue
*b. Muscular tissue
c. Neural tissue
d. Epithelial tissue
e. Special connective tissue

63. An infectious disease caused contractive activity of muscles that contract and dilate eye pupil (paralytic state). What functional eye system was damaged?
*a. Accomodative
b. Ancillary
c. Lacrimal apparatus
d. Photosensory
e. Dioptric

