1. Quite often the cause of secondary immunodeficiency is an infection involvement, when the causative agents propagate directly in the cells of immune system and destroy it. The following diseases are characterized by:
*a. Infectious mononucleosis, AIDS
b. Poliomyelitis, type A hepatitis
c. Q-febris, epidemic typhus
d. Dysentery, cholera
e. Tuberculosis, mycobacteriosis

2. It is planned to use the territory of an old cattle burial ground (which is not used for more than 50 years) for building houses. But ground analysis revealed presence of the pathogen of the very dangerous illness. Which of the indicated microorgonisms is likely to remain in the ground for such a long time?
a. Brucella abortus
b. Francisella tularensis
*c. Bacillus anthracis
d. Yersinia pestis
e. Mycobacterium bovis

3. From the nasopharynx of a 5-year-old child it was excreted amicroorganism which is identical to Corynebacterium diphtheriae dose according to morphological and biochemical signs.Microorganism does not produce exotoxin. As a result of what process can this microorganism become toxigenic?
a. Chromosome mutation
*b. Phage conversion
c. Passing through the organism of the sensative animals
d. Cultivation in the telluric environment
e. Growing with antitoxic serum

4. While studying a microslide obtained from the punctuate of a regional lymph node and stained by Romanovsky-Giemsa method a physician revealed some light-pink thin microorganisms with 12-14 regular spiral coils and pointed ends, up to 10-13 micrometer long. This might be the causative agent of the following disease:
a. Trypanosomiasis
b. Relapsing fever
c. Leishmaniasis
*d. Syphilis
e. Leptospirosis

5. Sanitary bacteriological research on water by the membrane filter method revealed two red colonies on a membrane filter (Endo agar) through which 500 ml of analyzed water were passed. Calculate the coli index and coli titer of the analyzed water:
*a. 4 and 250
b. 250 and 4
c. 250 and 2
d. 500 and 2
e. 2 and 500

6. While examining a patient an otolaryngologist noticed hyperaemia and significantly edematous tonsils with a grayish film upon them. Microscopical examination of this film revealed some gram-positive bacilli placed at an angle with each other. What disease might be suspected?
a. Angina
b. Meningococcal nasopharyngitis
c. Epidemic parotitis
*d. Diphtheria
e. Scarlet fever

7. Patient with vomiting, dizziness, sensation of dubble vision, difficult swallowing was admitted to the hospital. Doctor suspects botulism. What diagnostic methods should be used for diagnosis approving?
*a. Biological test, bacteriological
b. Bacteriological, mycological
c. -
d. Protozoological, microscopical
e. Allergic test, serological

8. A man who was bitten by the unknown dog applied to the surgeon. Wide ragged woundes were localised on the face. What curative-prophylactic aid should be given to prevent rabies?
a. Immediate injection of DPT(Diphtheria, Pertusis, Tetanus) vaccine
b. Prescribe combine antibiotic therapy
*c. Start immunisation with rabies vaccine
d. Hospitalize the patient and keep under the doctors supervision
e. Immediately inject normal gamma globulin

9. In a patient with clinical signs of immunodeficiency the number and functional activity of T and B lymphocytes are not changed. Defect with dysfunction of antigen-presentation to the immunocompetent cells was found during investigation on the molecule level. Defect of what cells is the most probable?
*a. Macrophages, monocytes
b. NK-cells
c. 0-lymphocytes
d. Fibroblasts, Т-lymphocytes, В-lymphocytes
e. Т-lymphocytes, В-lymphocytes

10. A patient with complaints of 3-day-long fever, general weakness, loss of appetite came to visit the infectionist. The doctor suspected enteric fever. Which method of laboratory diagnosis is the best to confirm the diagnosis?
a. Detachment of feces culture
b. Detachment of myeloculture
*c. Detachment of blood culture
d. Detachment of urine culture
e. Detachment of pure culture

11. A consumptive patient has an open pulmonary form of disease. Choose what sputum staining should be selected for finding out the tubercle (Kochs) bacillus?
a. Method of Romanowsky-Giemsa
b. Method of Neisser
c. Method of Burry-Gins
*d. Method of Ziel-Neelsen
e. Method of Gram

12. During surgical operation a blood transfusion was made. The blood must be checked to find antigens of some disease. What disease is expected to be found?
a. Enterovirus
b. Virus of hepatitis E
c. Virus of hepatitis A
d. Adenovirus
*e. Virus of hepatitis B

13. A 42-year-old man who has been injured in a car accident is brought into the emergency room. His blood alcohol level on admission is 250 mg/dL. Hospital records show a prior hospitalization for alcohol related seizures. His wife confirms that he has been drinking heavily for 3 weeks. What treatment should be provided to the patient if he goes into withdrawal?
a. Phenytoin
b. None
c. Phenobarbital
d. Pentobarbital
*e. Diazepam

14. A patient who came to the doctor because of his infertility was administered to make tests for toxoplasmosis and chronic gonorrhoea. Which reaction should be performed to reveal latent toxoplasmosis and chronic gonorrhoea of the patient?
a. RDHA - Reverse direct hemagglutination assay
b. RIHA - Reverse indirect hemagglutination assay
c. IFA - Immunofluorescence assay
d. Immunoblot analysis
*e. (R)CFT- Reiters complement fixation test

15. On bacteriological study of rinsing water of the patient with food poisoning, the pure bacterial culture was inoculated with the following properties: gram-negative motile bacillus in the Endo environment grows like achromic colony. Representative of what genus has caused the illness?
a. Shigella
b. Escherichia
c. Citrobacter
*d. Salmonella
e. Yersinia

16. The person was selling "homemade pork" sausages on the market. State sanitary inspector suspected falcification of the sausages.With help of what serological immune reaction can food substance be identified?
a. Indirect hemagglutination test
b. Immunofluorescence test
c. Complement- fixation test
*d. Precipitation test
e. Agglutination test

17. While registering the child to the school Mantus test was made to define whether revaccination was needed test result is negative. What does this result of the test mean?
a. Presence of antibodies for tubercle bacillus
*b. Absence of cell immunity to the tuberculosis
c. Absence of antibodies for tubercle bacillus
d. Presence of cell immunity to the tuberculosis
e. Absence of antitoxic immunity to the tuberculosis

18. The donor who for a long time didnt donate the blood was investigated with IFA method. Anti-HBs antibodies were revealed. What does positive result of IFA in this case mean?
a. Acute hepatitis B
b. Chronic hepatitis В
c. Chronic hepatitis С
*d. Previous hepatitis B
e. Acute hepatitis C

19. Bacteriological examination of purulent discharges from the urethra revealed gram-negative bacteria looking like coffee beans. They were localized in the leukocytes and could decompose glucose and maltose to acid. These are the causative agents of the following disease:
a. Melioidosis
*b. Gonorrhoea
c. Veneral lymphogranulomatosis
d. Syphilis
e. Soft chancre

20. Scraps of the mycelium of a fungus, spores, air bubbles and fat drops were discovered on microscopy of the patients hair excluded from the infected areas. For what fungus disease is this microscopic picture characteristic?
a. Epidermophytosis
b. Sporotrichosis
c. Microspory
d. Trichophytosis
*e. Favus

21. In order to speed up healing of a wound of oral mucosa a patient was prescribed a drug that is a thermostable protein occuring in tears, saliva, mothers milk as well as in a new-laid hens egg. It is known that this protein is a factor of natural resistance of an organism. What is it called?
*a. Lysozyme
b. Interferon
c. Imanine
d. Interleukin
e. Complement

22. Study of bacteriological sputum specimens stained by the Ziel-Neelsen method revealed some bright-red acid-resistant bacilli that were found in groups or singularly. When inoculated onto the nutrient media, the signs of their growth show up on the 10-15 day. These bacteria relate to the following family:
a. Histoplasma dubrosii
b. Yersinia pseudotuberculosis
*c. Micobacterium tuberculosis
d. Klebsiella rhinoscleromatis
e. Coxiella burnettii

23. A man was admitted to the hospital on the 5th day of disease that manifested itself by jaundice, muscle aching, chill, nose bleedings. In course of laboratory diagnostics a bacteriologist performed dark-field microscopy of the patients blood drop. Name a causative agent of this disease:
a. Borrelia dutlonii
b. Bartonella bacilloformis
c. Rickettsia mooseri
*d. Leptospira interrogans
e. Calymmatobacterium granulomatis

24. Gramnegative bin-shaped diplococcus inside and outside of leucocytes were detected on bacteriological examination of the purulent exudates from the cervix of the uterus. Name the causative agent of purulent inflammation of the cervix of the uterus
a. Calymmatobacterium granulomatis
*b. Neisseria gonorroeae
c. Haemophilus vaginalis
d. Chlamidia trachomatis
e. Trichomonas vaginalis

25. Patient with diarrhoea was admitted to the infection unit. Gramnegative curved rod-like bacteria were founded on bacterioscopic examination of faecal masses. What is the most likely disease in this patient?
a. Salmonellosis gastroenteritis
b. Typhoid fever
*c. Cholera
d. Diphtheria
e. Intestinal form of plague

26. In a 2-year-old child with catarrhal presentations and skin rash a pediatrician suspected scarlet fever. The child was given intracutaneously a small dose of serum antibody to the streptococcal erythrogenic toxin; on the site of injection the rash disappeared. What do the reaction results mean?
a. The child has hypersensitivity to the erythrogenic toxin
b. The whole serum dose may be injected intravenously
c. The child has very weak immune system
*d. The clinical diagnosis was confirmed
e. The disease wasnt caused by haemolytic streptococcus

27. From the defecation of a 6-year-old ill child, who has artificial feeding, the intestinal bacillus with antigen structure 0-111 is excreted. What is the diagnosis?
*a. Coli-enteritis
b. Cholera-like diseasis
c. Disentery-like diseasis
d. Food poisoning
e. Gastroenteritis

28. For serological diagnostics of the whooping cough it was made large-scale reaction with parapertussis and pertussis diagnosticums. At the bottom of the test-tubes with diagnosticum of Bordetella parapertussis grain-like sediment formed. What antibodies have this reaction revealed?
a. Opsonins
b. Precipitins
*c. Agglutinins
d. Bacteriolysins
e. Antitoxins

29. A man died from an acute infectious disease accompanied by fever, jaundice, haemorrhagic rash on the skin and mucous membranes as well as by acute renal insufficiency. Histological examination of renal tissue (stained by Romanovsky-Giemsa method) revealed some convoluted bacteria looking like C und S letters. What bacteria were revealed?
a. Treponema
b. Borrelia
c. Campilobacteria
*d. Leptospira
e. Spirilla

30. A 16 y.o. boy from a countryside entered an educational establishment. Scheduled Manteux test revealed that the boy had negative reaction. What are the most reasonable actions in this case?
a. To isolate the boy temporarily from his mates
b. To perform rapid Price diagnostics
c. To repeat the reaction in a month
d. To perform serodiagnostics of tuberculosis
*e. To perform BCG vaccination

31. Examination of a patient with pustular skin lesions allowed to isolate a causative agent that forms in the blood agar roundish yellow middle-sized colonies surrounded by haemolysis zone. Smears from the colonies contain irregular-shaped clusters of gram-positive cocci. The culture is oxidase- and catalase-positive, ferments mannitol and synthesizes plasmocoagulase. What causative agent was isolated?
a. Staphylococcus saprophyticus
*b. Staphylococcus aureus
c. Streptococcus pyogenes
d. Streptococcus agalactiae
e. Staphylococcus epidermidis

32. Microscopic examination of a Gram-stained scrape from patients tongue revealed oval, round, elongated chains of dark-violet gemmating cells. What disease can be caused by this causative agent?
*a. Candidosis
b. Streptococcic infection
c. Diphtheria
d. Staphylococcic infection
e. Actinomycosis

33. From pharynx of a child with suspected diphtheria a pure culture of microorganisms was isolated. Their morphological, tinctorial, cultural and biochemical properties appeared to be typical for diphtheria causative agents. What study should be conducted in order to drow a conclusion that this is a pathogenic diphtheria bacillus?
a. Estimation of ability to decompose starch
*b. Estimation of toxigenic properties
c. Estimation of urease activity
d. Estimation of proteolytic properties
e. Estimation of cystinous activity

34. Examination of a child revealed some whitish spots looking like coagulated milk on the mucous membrane of his cheeks and tongue. Analysis of smears revealed gram-positive oval yeast-like cells. What causative agents are they?
a. Actinomycetes
b. Fusobacteria
c. Staphylococci
d. Diphtheria bacillus
*e. Candida

35. A duodenal content smear of a patient with indigestion contains protosoa 10-18 mcm large. They have piriform bodies, 4 pairs of filaments, two symmetrically located nuclei in the broadened part of body. What kind of the lowest organisms is it?
a. Intestinal ameba
b. Balantidium
c. Dysentery ameba
d. Trichomonas
*e. Lamblia

36. Blood of a patient with presumable sepsis was inoculated into sugar broth. There appeared bottom sediment. Repeated inoculation into blood agar caused growth of small transparent round colonies surrounded by hemolysis zone. Examination of a smear from the sediment revealed gram-positive cocci in form of long chains. What microorganisms are present in blood of this patient?
a. Micrococci
b. Tetracocci
c. Sarcina
*d. Streptococci
e. Staphylococci

37. On bacteriological examination of the defecation of a 4-months-old baby with the symptoms of acute bowel infection there were revealed red colonies spread in the large quantity in the Endo environment. What microorganism can it be?
*a. Escherichia
b. Staphylococcus
c. Shigell
d. Streptococcus
e. Salmonella

38. Bacteriological examination of a patient with food poisoning required inoculation of a pure culture of bacteria with the following properties: gram-negative movable bacillus that grows in the Endos medium in form of colourless colonies. A representative of which species caused this disease?
a. Iersinia
b. Shigella
*c. Salmonella
d. Esherichia
e. Citrobacter

39. Examination of a young man in the AIDS centre produced a positive result of immune-enzyme assay with HIV antigens. Patients complaints about state of his health were absent. What can the positive result of immune-enzyme assay be evidence of?
*a. HIV infection
b. Being infected with HBV
c. HBV persistence
d. Having had AIDS recently
e. Being ill with AIDS

40. Microscopy of stained (Ziehl-Neelsen staining) smears taken from the sputum of a patient with chronic pulmonary disease revealed red bacilli. What property of tuberculous bacillus was shown up?
a. Sporification
*b. Acid resistance
c. Alcohol resistance
d. Alkali resistance
e. Capsule formation

41. Reaction of passive hemagglutination conducted with erythrocytic typhoid Vi-diagnosticum helped to reveal some antibodies in the dilution of the patients serum at a ratio of 1:80 that exceeds the diagnostic titer. Such result witnesses of:
a. Typhoid fever recurrence
b. Being ill with acute typhoid fever
*c. Being a potential carrier of typhoid bacilli
d. Incubation period of typhoid fever
e. Reconvalescence of a patient ill with typhoid fever

42. In order to determine toxigenicity of diphtheria bacilli a strip of filter paper impregnated with antitoxic diphtherial serum was put on the dense nutrient medium. There were also inoculated a microbal culture under examination and a strain that is known to be toxigenic. If the microbal culture under examination produces exotoxin, this wil result in formation of:
a. Precipitin ring
*b. Precipitin lines
c. Zones of diffuse opacification
d. Haemolysis zones
e. Zones of lecithovitellinous activity

43. A 50-year-old patient with typhoid fever was treated with Levomycetin, the next day his condition became worse, temperature rised to 39,60С. What caused worthening?
a. Irresponsiveness of an agent to the levomycetin
b. Allergic reaction
*c. The effect of endotoxin agent
d. Secondary infection addition
e. Reinfection

44. In order to estimate toxigenity of diphtheria agents obtained from patients the cultures were inoculated on Petri dish with nutrient agar on either side of a filter paper strip that was put into the centre and moistened with antidiphtheric antitoxic serum. After incubation of inoculations in agar the strip-like areas of medium turbidity were found between separate cultures and the strip of filter paper. What immunological reaction was conducted?
a. Opsonization reaction
*b. Precipitation gel reaction
c. Agglutination reaction
d. Coombs test
e. Rings precipitation reaction

45. A patient with clinical signs of encephalitis was delivered to the infectious diseases hospital. Anamnesis registers a tick bite. Hemagglutination-inhibition reaction helped to reveal antibodies to the causative agent of tick-borne encephalitis in the dilution 1:20 which is not diagnostic. What actions should the doctor take after he had got such result?
a. To apply more sensitive reaction
b. To examine the same serum
*c. To repeat the examination with serum taken 10 days later
d. To repeat examination with another diagnosticum
e. To deny diagnosis of tick-borne encephalitis

46. The first grade pupils were examined in order to sort out children for tuberculosis revaccination. What test was applied for this purpose?
a. Burnet test
b. Anthraxine test
c. Schick test
d. Supracutaneous tularin test
*e. Mantoux test

47. Clinical diagnosis of a female patient was gonorrhoea. What examination method can be applied for confirmation of this diagnosis?
a. Hemagglutination reaction
b. Immobilization reaction
c. Infection of laboratory animals
d. Test with bacteriophage
*e. Microscopy of pathological material

48. A patient suffering from periodical attacks caused by inhalation of different flavoring substances was diagnosed with atopic bronchial asthma. IgE level was increased. This is typical for the following type of reactions:
a. Cytotoxic reactions
b. delayed-type hypersensitivity
c. Autoimmune reactions
*d. Anaphylactic reactions
e. Immunocomplex reactions

49. Bacteriological laboratory examines canned meat whether it contains botulinum toxin. For this purpose an extract of test specimen and antitoxic antibotulinic serum of A, B, E types were introducted to a group of mice under examination; a control group of mice got the extract without antibotulinic serum. What serological reaction was applied?
a. Precipitation
b. Opsono-phagocytic
c. Double immune diffusion
*d. Neutralization
e. Complement binding

50. For the purpose of retrtospective diagnostics of recent bacterial dysentery it was decided to perform serological examination of blood serum in order to determine antibody titer towards Shiga bacilli. What of the following reactions should be applied?
a. Bacteriolysis
*b. Passive hemagglutination
c. Precipitation
d. Bordet-Gengou test
e. Hemolysis

51. During the repeated Widals agglutination test it was noticed that the ratio of antibody titers and O-antigens S.typhi in the patients serum had increased from 1:100 to 1:400. How would you interpret these results?
a. The patient is an acute carrier of typhoid microbes
b. The patient previously had typhoid fever
c. The patient was previously vaccinated against typhoid fever
*d. The patient has typhoid fever
e. The patient is a chronic carrier of typhoid microbs

52. A patient recovered from Sonne dysentery and was once more infected with the same causative agent. What is such infection form called?
a. Chronic infection
*b. Reinfection
c. Superinfection
d. Recidivation
e. Persisting infection

53. A 10-year-old child had the mantoux tuberculin test administered. 48 hours later a papule up to 8 mm in diameter appeared on the site of the injection. What type of hypersensitivity reaction developed after the tuberculin injection?
*a. Type IV hypersensitivity reaction
b. Seroreaction
c. Type II hypersensitivity reaction
d. Atopic reaction
e. Arthus phenomenon

54. A patient with clinical presentations of immunodeficiency went through immunological examinations. They revealed significant loss of cells that form rosettes with erythrocytes of a ram. What conclusion can be made according to the analysis data?
a. Decrease of natural killer cell rate
b. Decrease of B-lymphocytes rate
*c. Decrease of T-lymphocytes rate
d. Decrease of complement system rate
e. Insufficiency of effector cells of humoral immunity

55. As a result of durative antibiotic therapy a 37-year old patient developed intestinal dysbacteriosis. What type of drugs should be used in order to normalize intestinal microflora?
a. Bacteriophages
b. Sulfanilamides
*c. Eubiotics
d. Autovaccines
e. Vitamins

56. Among junior children of an orphanage an outbreak of intestinal infection with signs of colienteritis was registered. In order to identify isolated causative agent it is necessary to:
a. To study virulence of the causative agent
*b. Study antigenic properties of the causative agent
c. To study sensitivity to bacteriophages
d. To determine sensitivity to antibiotics
e. To study biochemical properties of the causative agent

57. Urine examination of a patient with acute cystitis revealed leukocytes and a lot of gram-negative bacilli. Inoculation resulted in growth of colonies of mucous nature that formed green soluble pigment. What microorganism is the most probable cause of the disease?
*a. Pseudomonas aeruginosa
b. Klebsiella pneumoniae
c. Salmonella enteritidis
d. Proteus mirabilis
e. Escherihia coli

58. A laboratory received a material from a patients wound. Ppreliminary diagnosis is gaseous gangrene. What microbiological method should be applied to determine species of causative agent?
a. RIA
*b. Bacteriological
c. Bacterioscopic
d. Allergic
e. Serological

59. A virological laboratory obtained pathological material (mucous discharges from nasal meatuses) taken from a patient with provisional diagnosis "influenza". What quick test will allow to reveal specific viral antigen in the material under examination?
*a. Direct and indirect immunofluorescence test
b. Hemagglutination inhibition assay
c. -
d. Radioimmunoassay
e. Direct and indirect fluorescence immunoassay

60. In the surgical department of a hospital there was an outbreak of hospital infection that showed itself in often postoperative wound abscesses. Bacteriological examination of pus revealed aurococcus. What examination shall be conducted to find out the source of this causative agent among the department personnel?
a. Biochemical identification
*b. Phagotyping
c. Serological identification
d. Microscopical examination
e. Estimation of antibiotic susceptibility

61. A 7 year old child often suffers from streptococcal angina. Doctor suspected development of rheumatism and administered serological examination. The provisional diagnosis will be most probably confirmed by presence of antibodies to the following streptococcal antigen:
a. C-carbohydrate
b. Erythrogenic toxin
c. Capsular polysaccharide
*d. O-streptolysin
e. M-protein

62. A culture of monkey cells (Vero) and a group of mouse sucklings were infected with an inoculum taken from a child with provisional diagnosis "enterovirus infection". There was no cytopathic effect on the cell culture but mouse sucklings died. What enteric viruses might have caused disease of this child?
a. Polioviruses
b. Unclassified enteric viruses 68-71
c. Coxsackie B
d. ECHO virus
*e. Coxsackie A

63. A patient has been suffering from elevated temperature and attacks of typical cough for 10 days. Doctor administered inoculation of mucus from the patients nasopharynx on the agar. What microorganism is presumed?
a. Staphylococcus
*b. Pertussis bacillus
c. Listeria
d. Pfeiffers bacillus
e. Klebsiella

64. A patient of surgical department complains about pain in the small of her back and in the lower part of her belly; painful and frequent urination. Bacteriological examination of urine revealed gram-negative oxidase-positive rod-like bacteria forming greenish mucoid colonies with specific smell. What causative agent can it be?
a. Proteus mirabilis
b. Str.pyogenes
c. Mycoplasma pneumonie
*d. Pseudomonas aeruginosa
e. E.coli

65. A female patient underwent liver transplantation. 1,5 month after  her condition became worse because of reaction of transplant rejection. What factor of immune system plays the leading part in this reaction?
a. B-lymphocytes
b. T-helpers
c. Interleukin-1
d. Natural killers
*e. T-killers

66. Microscopical examination of a microbal culture revealed fusiform spore-forming microorganisms that get violet-blue Grams stain. What microorganisms were revealed?
a. Diplococci
*b. Clostridia
c. Spirochaete
d. Streptococci
e. Actinomycete

67. A specimen stained by Ozheshko method contains rod-like microorganisms stained blue with round terminal components stained red. What are these components called?
a. Flagella
b. Cilia
*c. Spores
d. Capsules
e. Mesosomas

68. During the regular sanitary-epidemiological inspection of a pharmacy, the bacteriological analysis of air was performed. The air was found to have bacilli, yeast fungi, hemolytic streptococci, micrococci. Which of the detected microorganisms indicate the direct epidemic danger?
a. Micrococci
b. Yeast fungi
c. -
*d. Haemolytic streptococci
e. Bacilli

69. A bacteriological laboratory received sputum sample of a patient suffering from tuberculosis. Bacterioscopic examination of smears and detection of tuberculosis bacillus can be realized by one of enrichment methods that involves processing of sputum only with solution of caustic soda. What is this method called?
a. Flotation
b. Inactivation
*c. Homogenization
d. Filtration
e. Neutralization

70. A pregnant woman was registered in an antenatal clinic and underwent complex examination for a number of infections. Blood serum contained IgM to the rubella virus. What is this result indicative of?
a. The woman is healthy
b. Of a chronic process
*c. Of primary infection
d. Of exacerbation of a chronic disease
e. Of recurring infection with rubella virus

71. A 65-year-old man has purulent abscess on his neck. Analyses revealed a culture of gram-positive cocci with plasmocoagulase activity. This culture relates most likely to:
a. Streptococcus pyogenes
b. Staphylococcus saprophyticus
c. -
*d. Staphylococcus aureus
e. Staphylococcus epidermidis

72. Material taken from a patient with provisional diagnosis "influenza" was referred to a laboratory. For virological examination the hemadsorption reaction was applied. This reaction can be applied for detection of the following viruses:
*a. Viruses containing hemagglutinins
b. All the complex viruses
c. Any viruses
d. DNA-genomic viruses
e. All the simple viruses

73. Vomiting matters of a patient suspected of having cholera were delivered to the bacteriological laboratory. The material was used for preparing a "hanging drop" specimen. What type of microscopy will be applied for identification of the causative agent by its mobility?
*a. Phase-contrast microscopy
b. Immune and electron microscopy
c. Immersion microscopy
d. Fluorescence microscopy
e. Electron microscopy

74. Inoculum from pharynx of a patient ill with angina was inoculated into blood-tellurite agar. It resulted in growth of grey, radially striated (in form of rosettes) colonies 4-5 mm in diameter. Gram-positive bacilli with clublike thickenings on their ends placed in form of spread wide apart fingers are visible by microscope. What microorganisms are these?
a. Streptococci
b. Streptobacilli
c. Botulism clostridia
d. Diphtheroids
*e. Diphtheria corynebacteria

75. During examination of a patient a dentist revealed a lot of "white spots" - zones of enamel demineralization. What microorganisms take part in the development of this process?
a. Staphylococcus epidermidis
*b. Streptococcus mutans
c. Streptococcus pyogenes
d. Streptococcus salivarius
e. Veilonella parvula

76. Planned mass vaccination of all newborn 5-7 day old children against tuberulosis plays an important role in tuberculosis prevention. In this case the following vaccine is applied:
a. Diphtheria and tetanus anatoxin vaccine
b. Diphteria and tetanus toxoids and pertussis vaccine
*c. BCG
d. Adsorbed diphtheria vaccine
e. -

77. A 4-year-old child presents with general weakness, sore throat and deglutitive problem. After his examination a doctor suspected diphtheria and sent the material to the bacteriological laboratory. In order to determine the diphtheria causative agent the material should be inoculated into the following differential diagnostic medium:
*a. Blood tellurite agar
b. Ploskyrevs agar
c. Levenshtein-Yessen agar
d. Sabourauds agar
e. Endos agar

