1. A 10-year-old child complains of weakness, nausea, irritability. Helminthes of white color and 5-10 mm long were found on the underwear. On microscopy of the scrape from the perianal folds achromic ovums of unsymmetrical form were revealed. Indicate what helminth is parasiting on the child?
a. Trichuris
b. Ancylostoma duodenalis
*c. Enterobins vermicularis
d. Trichina
e. Ascaris lumbricoides

2. A patient has been brought to the hospital with the complaints of headache, pain in left hypochondrium. He has been ill for 1,5 weeks. The sudden illness began with the increase of body temperature up to 39,9oC. In 3 hours the temperature decreased and hydropoiesis began. The attacks repeat rhythmically in 48 hours. The patient had visited one an African country. The doctors have suspected malaria. What method of laboratory diagnostics is necessary to use?
a. Urine examination
*b. Blood examination
c. Stool examination
d. Immunological tests
e. Examination of vaginal and urethral discharge

3. Slime, blood and protozoa 30-200 microns of length have been revealed in a mans feces. The body is covered with cilias and has correct oval form with a little bit narrowed forward and wide round shaped back end. On the forward end a mouth is visible. In cytoplasm there are two nucleuses and two short vacuoles. For whom are the described attributes typical?
*a. Balantidium
b. Dysenteric amoeba
c. Intestinal amoeba
d. Trichomonas
e. Lamblia

4. A patient in three weeks after acute myocardial infarction has pain in the heart and joints and pneumonia. What is the main mechanism of development of post-infarction Dressler’s syndrome?
*a. Autoimmune inflammation
b. Resorption of enzymes from necrotized area of myocardium
c. Vessels thrombosis
d. Secondary infection
e. Ischemia of myocardium

5. During the fetal period of the development in the vascular system of the fetus large arterial (Botallos) duct is functioning which converts into lig. arteriosum after birth. What anatomical formations does this duct connect between each other?
*a. Pulmonary trunk and aorta
b. Aorta and inferior vena cava
c. Aorta and superior vena cava
d. Pulmonary trunk and superior vena cava
e. Right and left auricle

6. Young man felt sharp pain in the back during active tightening on the horizontal bar. Objectively: pain while moving of upper extremity, limited pronation and adduction functions. Sprain of what muscle is presented?
a. М. levator scapulae
b. М. trapezius
c. М. subscapularis
*d. М. latissimus dorsi
e. М. romboideus major

7. Children often have heavy nasal breathing resulting from excessive development of lymphoid tissue of pharyngeal mucous membrane. What tonsils growth may cause this effect?
a. All above mentioned tonsils
*b. Tonsilla pharyngea
c. Tonsilla lingualis
d. Tonsilla palatina
e. Tonsilla tubaria

8. In course of laparotomy a surgeon revealed gangrenous lesion of descending colon. It was caused by thrombosis of the following artery:
*a. Sinister colic
b. Dexter colic
c. Superior mesenteric artery
d. Ileocolic
e. Median colic

9. Three separate bones connected with cartilage in the area of pelvis cavity are noticed on the X-ray of the pelvis. What are these bones?
a. Sacral, pubic, coccyx
*b. Iliac, pubic, sciatic
c. Sciatic, femoral, sacral
d. Pubic, sciatic, femoral
e. Iliac, sacral, coccyx

10. A 60-year-old patient has reduced perception of high-frequency sounds. What structures disorder of auditory analizer caused these changes?
*a. Main membrane of cochlea near the oval window
b. Eustachian tube
c. Tympanic membrane
d. Muscles of middle ear
e. Main membrane of cochlea near helicotrema

11. The alveolar ventilation of the patient is 5 L/min, the breath frequency is 10 per/min, and the tidal volume is 700 ml. What is the patients dead space ventilation?
a. 0,7 L/min
b. 4,3 L/min
c. -
*d. 2,0 L/min
e. 1,0 L/min

12. During investigation of patient, it was found formation in the white substance of cerebral hemispheres with location in the knee and frontal part of posterior crus of internal capsule. Fibres of what conductive tract of the brain will be disrupted?
a. Tr. parietooccipitopontinus
*b. Tr. pyramidalis
c. Тr. thalamocorticalis
d. Tr. frontothalamicus
e. Tr. frontopontinus

13. Only one factor can influence the charge of amino acid radicals in the active centre of enzyme. Name this factor:
*a. pH medium
b. Temperature
c. The surplus of a product
d. The presence of a competitive inhibitor
e. Pressure

14. Succinate dehydrogenase catalyses the dehydrogenation of succinate. Malonic acid HOOC-CH2-COOH is used to interrupt the action of this enzyme. Choose the inhibition type:
a. Dephosphorylation
*b. Competitive
c. Non-competitive
d. Allosteric
e. Limited proteolysis

15. The gluconeogenesis is activated in the liver after intensive physical trainings .What substance is utilized in gluconeogenesis first of all in this case:
a. Glutamate
b. Alanine
c. Pyruvate
d. Glucose
*e. Lactate

16. A patient with a stab wound of the anterior stomach wall is in surgical care. What formation of abdominal cavity did the stomach contents get into?
a. Left mesenteric sinus
b. Right mesenteric sinus
c. Omental bursa
d. Hepatic bursa
*e. Antegastrial bursa

17. A patient had been taking glucocorticoids for a long time. When the preparation was withdrawn he developed the symptoms of disease aggravation, decreased blood pressure and weakness. What is the reason of this condition?
*a. Appearance of adrenal insufficiency
b. Sensibilization
c. Cumulation
d. Habituation
e. Hyperproduction of ACTH

18. A patient has tissue ischemia below the knee joint accompanied with intermittent claudication. What artery occlusion should be suspected?
a. Proximal part of femoral artery
*b. Popliteal artery
c. Posterior tibial artery
d. Peroneal artery
e. Anterior tibial artery

19. A patient, who suffers from congenital erythropoietic porphyria, has skin photosensitivity. The accumulation of what compound in the skin can cause it?
*a. Uroporphyrinogen 1
b. Uroporphyrinogen 2
c. Heme
d. Coproporphyrinogen 3
e. Protoporphyrin

20. A patient has a malignisation of thoracic part of esophagus. What lymphatic nodes are regional for this organ?
*a. Anulus lymphaticus cardiae
b. Nodi lymphatici prevertebralis
c. Nodi lymphatici mediastinales posteriores
d. Nodi lymphatici pericardiales laterales
e. Nodi lymphatici paratrachealis

21. The patient has come to the hospital from the smelting workshop in the condition of hyperthermia. What is the direct cause of loss of consciousness at the heat stroke?
a. Increased water loss through sweating
b. Arterial pressure drop
*c. Decreased brain blood supply
d. Decrease of heart output
e. Dilatation of peripheral vessels

22. A patients blood was analyzed and the decreased erythrocyte’s sedimentation rate (ESR) was discovered. What disease from the listed below is accompanied with decreased ESR?
a. Vitamin B deficiency
b. Myocardial infarction
c. Hepatitis
d. Splenomegaly
*e. Polycytemia

23. A 55-year-old patien was hospitalized in result of the trauma of the medial group of femoral muscles. What kind of movements is the patient unable to do?
a. Suppination of femur
*b. Adduction of femur
c. Flexion of femur
d. Abduction of femur
e. Extension of femur

24. A mother of a newborn complains of her babys constant belching with undigested milk. Which developmental anomaly is it an evidence of?
a. Faux lupinum
b. Labium leporium
*c. Esophageal atresia
d. Anal atresia
e. Esophageal fistula

25. During the endoscopy the inflammation of a major papilla of the duodenum and the disturbances of bile secretion were found. In which part of duodenum were the problems found?
a. Bulb
b. Ascendant part
*c. Descendent part
d. Upper horizontal part
e. Lower horizontal part

26. A 18-year-old patient came to the out-patient department with the complaints of bleeding trauma in the vestibule of his nose. On examination: the mechanical injure of the mucous layer of the vestibule without continuation into nasal cavity proper. What is the boundary between the vestibule and nasal cavity proper?
a. Nostrils
*b. Nasal limen
c. Nasal septa
d. Nasal roller
e. Choanes

27. A 32-year-old patient has been diagnosed with bartholinitis (inflammation of Bartholins glands ). In what part of the female urogenital system are the Bartholins glands located?
*a. The labia major
b. The clitoris
c. The uterus
d. The vagina
e. The labia minor

28. A 50 year-old patient had hemorrhage of the brain and was taken to the hospital. The place of hemorrhage was revealed on the lateral hemispheres surfaces during the medical examination. What artety was injured ?
a. The posterior cerebral artery
b. The anterior cerebral artery
*c. The middle cerebral artery
d. The anterior communicating artery
e. The posterior communicating artery

29. A 30-year-old patient was hospitalized due to bleeding of the facial artery . What place on the face has to be pressed to stop bleeding?
a. The mental process
b. The nose’s back
c. The molar bone
*d. The mandible’s edge
e. The mandible’s branch

30. A 19 year-old patient was diagnosed with appendicitis and was hospitalized. The surgical operation on ablating appendix vermiformis is to be performed. What artery must be fixed to stop bleeding during the surgical operation?
a. The colica sinistra
b. The iliac
c. The colica dextra
d. The colica media
*e. The ileocolic artery

31. A 45-year-old man fell on the right knee and felt the acute pain in the joint. On examination: severe edema on the anterior surface of the knee joint. Crunching sounds are heard while moving the joint. Which bone is destroyed?
a. Neck of the thigh bone
b. Right epicondyle of the thigh
c. Head of the thigh bone
*d. Knee-cap
e. Left epicondyle of the thigh

32. During the operation on the hip joint of a 5-year-old child her ligament was damaged which caused bleeding.What ligament was damaged?
a. Perpendicular of the acetabule
b. Pubofemoral
c. Ischiofemoral
*d. The head of the thigh
e. Iliofemoral

33. A 6-year-old child fell on the cutting object and traumatized soft tissues between tibia and fibula . What kind of bone connection was injured?
a. Suture
b. Fontanel
c. Gomphosis
*d. Membrane
e. Ligament

34. Usually the intravenous injection is done into median cubital vein because it is slightly movable due to fixation by the soft tissues. What does it fix in the cubital fossa?
a. Brachioradial muscle
b. Anconeus muscle
c. Tendon of the triceps muscle
d. Brachial muscle
*e. Aponeurosis of biceps muscle

35. Victim has elbow joint trauma with avulsion of medial epicondyle of humerus. What nerve can be damaged in this trauma?
a. Medial cutaneous nerve of forearm
*b. Ulnar
c. Musculocutaneous nerve
d. Radial
e. Cardiac cutaneous nerve

36. A 54-year-old man was admitted to the hospital with complaints of pain in the right subcostal region, vomiting with blood. Objectively: enlarged liver, varicose veins in the stomach and esophagus. Disfunction of what vessel is likely to be?
a. Vena cava inferior
*b. Vena porta
c. Vena hepatica
d. Aorta abdominalis
e. Vena cava superior

37. Examination of a 2-year-old child revealed physical developmental lag, the child often has pneumonias. The child was diagnosed with nonclosure of ductus arteriosus. Haemodynamics disorder was caused by the intercommunication of the following vessels:
a. Pulmonary trunk and pulmonary veins
b. Superior cava and pulmonary trunk
c. Aorta and pulmonary veins
*d. Aorta and pulmonary trunk
e. Superior cava and aorta

38. A 5-year-old child was admitted to the otorhinolaryngological department with diagnosis - suppurative inflammation of the middle ear. Disease started from the inflammation of the nasopharynx. Through the what canal of the temporal bone did the infection get into the tympanic cavity?
a. Carotid canal
b. Tympanic Canaliculus tympanicus
*c. Musculortubal canal
d. Canaliculus chordal tympani
e. Canaliculi caroticotympanici

39. Inflammation of the tympanic cavity (purulent otitis media) was complicated by inflammation of mammillary process sockets. What wall of tympanic cavity did the pus penetrate into the sockets through?
a. Lateral
b. Superior
c. Anterior
d. Medial
*e. Posterior

40. A 19-year-old female suffers from tachycardia in rest condition, weight loss, excessive sweating, exophtalmos and irritability. What hormone would you expect to find elevated in her serum?
a. Cortisol
b. ACTH
c. Insulin
*d. Thyroxine
e. Mineralocorticoids

41. A 60-year-old patient was diagnosed with hypothalamic lateral nuclei stroke. What changes in patient’s behavior may be expected?
a. Unsatisfied hunger
*b. The rejection of food
c. Depression
d. Aggressive behaviour
e. Thirst

42. The process of heart transplantation determined the viability of myocardial cells. The determination of what myocardium parameter is the most important?
*a. Rest potential of cardiomyocytes
b. Concentration of oxygen in heart vessels
c. Concentration of Ca-ions in heart vessels
d. Concentration of calcium-ions in myofibrils
e. Heart temperature

43. It is necessary to take the cerebrospinal fluid from a patient with suspected inflammation of brain tunics. Diagnostic puncture was performed between the arches of the lumbar vertebras. During the puncture the needle went through the following ligament:
a. Anterior longitudinal
b. Iliolumbar
*c. Yellow (flaval)
d. Posterior longitudinal
e. Intertransverse

44. Nowadays about 50 minor bases have been found in the t-RNA structure besides the main four nitrogenous bases. Choose the minor nitrogenous base:
*a. Dihydrouracil
b. Cysteine
c. Cytosine
d. Adenine
e. Uracil

45. Obturative jaundice developed in a 60-year-old patient because of malignant tumour of the big papillary of the duodenal. Lumen of what anatomical structure is squeezed with tumour?
a. Common hepatic duct
b. Cystic duct
*c. Hepatopancreatic ampulla
d. Right hepatic duct
e. Left hepatic duct

46. The patient with thymoma (thymus gland tumour) has cyanosis, extention of subcutaneous venous net and edema of the soft tissues of face, neck, upper part of the trunk and upper extremities. What venous trunk is pressed with tumour?
a. Clavicular vein
b. External jugular vein
*c. Superior vena cava
d. Internal jugular vein
e. Frontal jugular vein

47. A patient operated on complicated appendicitis has the following changes of blood count: erythrocytes - 4,0*10^12/l, Нb - 120 g/l, color index - 0,9, leukocytes – 18*10^9/l, basophils - 0, eosinophils - 0, myelocytes - 0, juvenile - 0, stab neutrophils - 20, segmentonuclear neutrophils - 53, lymphocytes - 21, monocytes - 5. How is such nuclear shift of leukocytic formula called?
a. Regeneratively-degenerative
*b. Degenerative left shift
c. Regenerative left shift
d. Right shift
e. Hyperregenerative

48. Patient complains of frequent and difficult urination. Imperfection of what formation can cause it?
*a. Prostate
b. Bulb-uretic glands
c. Sperm bubbles
d. Testicle adnexa
e. Testicles

49. Child inspired button. Where is it likely to be?
a. In the gullet
*b. In the right main bronchus
c. In the trachea
d. In the left main bronchus
e. In the larynx

50. Vegetative abnormalities in the sleep, heat regulation, all kinds of metabolism, diabetes insipidus are developing in the patient due to grouth of the tumour in the III ventricle of brain. Irritation of the nucleus of what part of the brain can cause this symptoms?
a. Mesencephalic tegmentum
b. Cerebral peduncles (cruces cerebri)
*c. Hypothalamus
d. Pons cerebelli
e. Medulla

51. A patient with infectious mononucleosis had been taking glucocorticoids for two weeks. He was brought into remission, but he fell ill with acute attack of chronic tonsillitis. What action of glucocorticoids caused this complication?
a. Anti-inflammatory
b. Antiallergic
c. Antitoxic
*d. Immunosuppressive
e. Antishock

52. A 45-year-old man with domestic upper limb injuiry came to the trauma unit. The objective data are: there are no extension, adduction or pronation functions of the arm. What muscle damage caused this condition?
*a. Teres major
b. Teres minor
c. Supraspinous
d. Subspinous
e. Subscapular

53. A man with internal abdominal right side injury and suspicion of liver rupture was admitted to the traumatological department. In what peritonial structure will blood accumulate?
a. Bursa omentalis
b. Fossa ischio-analis
c. Recessus duodenalis inferior
*d. Excavatio rectovesicalis
e. Recessus intersigmoideus

54. A histological spacemen presents parenchymal organ, which has cortex and medulla. Cortex consists of epitheliocytes bars with blood capillaries between them; the bars form three zones. Medulla consists of chromaffinocytes and venous sinusoids. Which organ has these morphological features?
*a. Adrenal gland
b. Lymph node
c. Thyroid
d. Thymus
e. Kidney

55. After trauma a 44-year-old patient had a rupture of left palm muscle tendons and of the surface of blood vessels. After operation and removal of the most part of the necrotically changed muscle tissue the bloodstream was normalized. What vessels have helped with restoration of bloodstream?
a. Aa. digitales palmares communes
b. Arcus palmaris superficialis
*c. Arcus palmaris profundus
d. Aa. metacarpeae palmares
e. Aa. perforantes

56. A 45-year-old man applied to the trauma unit because of domestic shoulder trauma. Objectively: flexibility, reduction and pronation functions of the shoulder are absent. What muscle was injured?
*a. Teres major muscle
b. Teres minor muscle
c. Supraspinous muscle
d. Infraspinous muscle
e. Subscapular muscle

57. Ovarian tumour was diagnozed in the woman. Surgery was indicated. What ligament should be cut by the surgeon to disconnect the ovary and the uterus?
a. Lateral umbilical ligament
b. Broad ligament of uterus
*c. The ovarial ligament
d. Suspensory ligament of ovary
e. Round ligament of uterus

58. An old woman was hospitalized with acute pain, edema in the right hip joint; the movements in the joint are limited. Which bone or part of it was broken?
a. The body of the thigh bone
b. Pubic bone
c. Ischial bone
*d. The neck of the thigh
e. Condyle of the thigh

59. A 53-year-old female patient was diagnosed with liver rupture resulting from a blunt abdominal injury. The escaped blood will be assembled in the following anatomic formation:
a. Left mesenteric sinus
*b. Rectouterine pouch
c. Right mesenteric sinus
d. Vesicouterine pouch
e. Omental bursa

60. A patient complains about edemata of legs, skin cyanosis, small ulcers on one side of the lateral condyle. Examination revealed a swelling, enlarged veins, formation of nodes. The pathological process has started in the following vein:
a. V. profunda femoris
b. V. iliaca externa
c. V. saphena magna
d. V. femoralis
*e. V. saphena parva

61. A 70 year old female patient was diagnosed with fracture of left femoral neck accompanied by disruption of ligament of head of femur. The branch of the following artery is damaged:
a. External iliac
b. Femoral
*c. Obturator
d. Inferior gluteal
e. Internal pudendal

62. A woman underwent an operation on account of extrauterine (tubal) pregnancy. In course of the operation the surgeon should ligate the branches of the following arteries:
a. Uterine and superior cystic
b. Uterine and inferior cystic
c. Superior cystic and ovarian
d. Inferior cystic and ovarian
*e. Uterine and ovarian

63. A 6 month old baby ill with bronchitis was taken for an X-ray of chest. Apart of changes associated with bronchi the X-ray film showed a shadow of thymus gland. What might have caused such changes?
a. It is caused by abnormal position
b. Its the effect of bronchitis
*c. The above-mentioned condition is a normal variant for this age
d. It is caused by thymus inflammation
e. It is caused by neoplastic process

64. A 7-year-old child cant abduct the shoulder, raise it to the horizontal level. He can raise the hand to the face only with dorsal side with abduction of the shoulder (with help of supraspinous muscle ) - "bugler" arm. Active function of what muscle is absent?
a. Pectoral major
b. Infraspinous
*c. Deltoid
d. Teres minor
e. Teres major

65. A 7-year-old girl has signs of anemia. Laboratory examination revealed pyruvate kinase deficiency in erythrocytes. What process disturbance plays the main role in anemia development?
*a. Anaerobic glycolysis
b. Tissue respiration
c. Aminoacids desamination
d. Peroxide decomposition
e. Oxidative phosphorylation

66. A patient complained about being unable to adduct and abduct fingers in the metacarpophalangeal articulations towards and away from the 3rd finger. Which muscles function is impaired?
a. Breviflexors of fingers
b. Lumbrical muscles
*c. Interosseous muscles
d. Long flexors of fingers
e. Extensors

67. A 45-year-old patient was admitted to the surgical department with complaints of abrupt sharp pain in the epigastric region. After examination it was diagnosed: perforated ulcer of the posterior wall of the stomach. Where did content of the stomach flow out while perforation?
a. To the proventriculus sack
b. To the liver bursa
*c. To the omental bursa
d. To the left mesenteric sinus
e. To the right mesenteric sinus

68. A 25-year-old patient complained of the decreased vision. Accommodation disorders, dilated pupil, not reacting on the light were revealed on examination. Function of what muscles is disturbed?
a. Lateral rectus muscle, pupil narrowing
b. Pupil narrowing and dilating muscle
c. Pupil dilating muscle, ciliary
d. Inferior oblique muscle, ciliary
*e. Pupil narrowing muscle, ciliary

69. Microspecimen of spinal cord contains a nucleus that should be analyzed. Its neurons form motor endings in the skeletal muscles. What nucleus of spinal cord is meant?
a. Thoracic nucleus
b. Proper nucleus of the posterior horn
c. Proper nucleus of gray substance
*d. Proper nucleus of the anterior horn
e. Intermediate lateral nucleus

70. A man with cut wound of his right foot sole was admitted to the hospital ward. The patient has limited elevation of the lateral foot edge. In course of wound management the injury of a muscle tendon was revealed. What muscle is injured?
a. Long extensor muscle of toes
b. Anterior tibial
*c. Long peroneal
d. Triceps muscle of crus
e. Short peroneal

71. A 35 year old man with a trauma of his left hand was admitted to the traumatology department. Objectively: cut wound of palmar surface of left hand; middle phalanxes of II–V fingers dont bend. What muscles are damaged?
a. Dorsal interosseous muscles
*b. Superficial finger flexor
c. Lumbrical muscles
d. Profound finger flexor
e. Palmar interosseous muscles

72. A 38-year-old patient came to a traumatology centre and complained about an injury of his right hand. Objectively: the patient has a cut wound in the region of the thenar eminence on the right hand; distal phalanx of the I finger cannot be flexed. What muscle was injured?
a. Opposer muscle of thumb
b. Abductor muscle of thumb
c. Short flexor muscle of thumb
d. Short abductor muscle of thumb
*e. Long flexor muscle of thumb

73. A patient with neuritis of femoral nerve has disturbed flexion of thigh as well as disturbed crus extension in the knee joint. What muscles function is disturbed?
a. Biceps muscle of thigh
b. Semitendinous muscle
c. Semimembranous muscle
*d. Quadriceps muscle of thigh
e. Triceps muscle of thigh

74. In the specimen of one of the parts of respiratory system a tubular organ was found. It has low epithelium, well developed muscular tunic, glands and cartilage are absent. Name this organ:
a. Median bronchs
*b. Minor bronchs
c. Larynx
d. Trachea
e. Major bronchs

75. Where should the cathetor for evacuation of the lymph from the thoracic lymph duct be inserted?
*a. To the left venous corner
b. To the superior vena cava
c. To the left inguinal vein
d. To the inferior vena cava
e. To the right venous corner

76. A patient has difficulties with hand movement. Examination revealed inflammation of common synovial sheath of flexor muscles. It is known from the patients anamnesis that he got a stab wound of finger a week ago. Which finger was most probably damaged?
a. Pollex
b. Index
c. Digitus anularis
*d. Digitus minimus
e. Digitus medius

77. An injured man has bleeding from branches of carotid artery. For a temporary arrest of bleeding it is necessary to press the carotid artery to the tubercle of a cervical vertebra. Which vertebra is it?
a. IV
b. V
*c. VI
d. III
e. II

78. As a result of an accident a patient has intense painfullness and edema of the anterior crus surface; dorsal flexion of foot is hindered. Function of which crus muscle is most likely to be disturbed?
a. M.flexor hallucis longus
b. M.flexor digitorum longus
*c. M.tibialis anterior
d. M.peroneus longus
e. M.peroneus brevis

79. A 40-year-old patient complains of intensive heartbeats, sweating, nausea, visual impairment, arm tremor, hypertension. From his anamnesis: 2 years ago he was diagnosed with pheochromocytoma. Hyperproduction of what hormones causes the given pathology?
a. ACTH
b. Thyroidal hormones
c. Aldosterone
d. Glucocorticoids
*e. Catecholamines

80. A patient who suffers from cancer of back of tongue has an intense bleeding as a result of affection of dorsal lingual artery by the tumour. What vessel should be ligated to stop bleeding?
a. Dorsal lingual artery
b. Facial artery
c. Ascending pharyngeal artery
*d. Lingual artery
e. Deep lingual artery

81. A 58-year-old patient with acute cardiac insufficiency has decreased volume of daily urine - oliguria. What is the mechanism of this phenomenon?
a. Reduced permeability of renal filter
*b. Decreased glomerular filtration
c. Drop of oncotic blood pressure
d. Decreased number of functioning glomerules
e. Rise of hydrostatic blood pressure in capillars

82. An 18-year-old man was delivered to the hospital after a road accident. Examination at the traumatological department revealed multiple injuries of soft tissues of face in the region of the medial eye angle. The injuries caused massive haemorrhage. What arterial anastomosis might have been damaged in this region?
a. a. subclavia et a. ophthalmica
b. a. carotis interna et a. ophthalmica
c. a. carotis externa et a. subclavia
d. a. carotis interna et a. subclavia
*e. a. carotis externa et a. carotis interna

83. After a 2 y.o. child has had flu, there appeared complaints about ear ache. A doctor revealed hearing impairment and inflammation of the middle ear. How did the infection penetrate into the middle ear?
a. Through atrium mastoideum
b. Through canalis nasolacrimalis
c. Through foramen jugularis
d. Through canalis caroticus
*e. Through the auditory tube

84. A surgeon has to find the common hepatic duct during the operative intervention on account of concrements in the gall ducts. The common hepatic duct is located between the leaves of:
*a. Hepatoduodenal ligament
b. Hepatorenal ligament
c. Venous ligament
d. Round ligament of liver
e. Hepatogastric ligament

85. Cerebral trauma caused increase of ammonia formation. What aminoacid takes part in removal of ammonia from cerebral tissue?
a. Valine
b. Tyrosine
*c. Glutamic
d. Tryptophan
e. Lisine

86. A 40-year-old woman was admitted to the infectious diseases department with high body temperature. Objectively: marked meningeal symptoms. A spinal cord punction was made. What anatomic formation was puncturated?
a. Cisterna cerebellomedullaris posterior
*b. Spatium subarachnoideum
c. Spatium epidurale
d. Spatium subdurale
e. Cavum trigeminale

87. After resection of the middle third of femoral artery obliterated by a thromb the lower extremity is supplied with blood due to the surgical bypass. Name an artery that plays the main role in reestablishment of blood flow:
a. Deep external pudendal artery
*b. Deep femoral artery
c. Descending genicular artery
d. Superficial circumflex artery of hip bone
e. Superficial epigastric artery

88. A patients knee joint doesnt extend, there is no knee-jerk reflex, skin sensitivity of the anterior femoral surface is disturbed. What nerve structures are damaged?
*a. Femoral nerve
b. Big fibular nerve
c. Inferior gluteal nerve
d. Obturator nerve
e. Superior gluteal nerve

89. The electronic microphoto of kidney fragment has exposed afferent glomerular arteriole, which has giant cells under its endothelium, containing secretory granules. Name the type of these cells:
*a. Juxtaglomerular
b. Smoothmuscular
c. Interstitial
d. Juxtavascular
e. Mesangial

90. A 50 y.o. patient was admitted to the hospital with complaints about pain behind his breastbone, asphyxia during physical activity. Angiography revealed pathological changes in the posterior interventricular branch of the right coronary artery. What heart parts are affected?
a. Right atrium
b. Right atrioventricular valve
c. Left atrium
d. Anterior wall of the right and left ventricles
*e. Posterior wall of the right and left ventricles

91. A patient was admitted to the surgical department with suspected inflammation of Meckels diverticulum. What part of bowels should be examined in order to discover the diverticulum in course of an operation?
a. Duodenum
b. Caecum
c. Colon ascendens
*d. Ileum
e. Jejunum

92. Examination of a newborn boys genitals revealed a cleft of urethra that opens on the inferior surface of his penis. What developmental anomaly is meant?
a. Cryptorchism
*b. Hypospadia
c. Epispadia
d. Hermaphroditism
e. Monorchism

93. A patient complains about impaired evacuatory function of stomach (long-term retention of food in stomach). Examination revealed a tumour of initial part of duodenum. Specify localization of the tumour:
a. Pars inferior
b. Pars ascendens
c. Flexura duodeni inferior
*d. Pars superior
e. Pars descendens

94. A man after 1,5 litre blood loss has suddenly reduced diuresis. The increased secretion of what hormone caused such diuresis alteration?
a. Cortisol
b. Parathormone
c. Corticotropin
d. Natriuretic
*e. Vasopressin

95. A young man consulted a doctor about disturbed urination. Examination of his external genitals revealed that urethra is split on top and urine runs out of this opening. What anomaly of external genitals development is the case?
a. Hypospadia
*b. Epispadia
c. Hermaphroditism
d. Phimosis
e. Paraphimosis

96. A 35 year old patient applied to a doctor with complaints about having intense rhinitis and loss of sense of smell for a week. Objectively: nasal cavity contains a lot of mucus that covers mucous membrane and blocks olfactory receptors. In what part of nasal cavity are these receptors situated?
a. Vestibule of nose
*b. Superior nasal turbinate
c. Inferior nasal turbinate
d. Median nasal turbinate
e. Common nasal meatus

97. Inflammatory process of modified subserous layer around cervix of the uterus caused an intensive pain syndrome. In what region of genitals does the pathological process take place?
a. Perimetrium
*b. Parametrium
c. Myometrium
d. Mesometrium
e. Endometrium

98. In course of an operation surgeon removed a part of a lung that was ventilated by a tertiary bronchus accompanied by branches of pulmonary artery and other vessels. What part of a lung was removed?
a. Inferior lobe
b. Middle lobe
*c. Bronchopulmonary segment
d. Superior lobe
e. Pulmonary lobule

99. While examining the oral cavity a stomatologist revealed inflammation of papillae on the border of the median and posterior third of the back of tongue. What papillae are inflamed?
a. Papillae fungiformes
b. Papillae filiformes
c. Papillae conicae
*d. Papillae vallatae
e. Papillae foliatae

100. Examination of a patient revealed an abscess of pterygopalatine fossa. Where can the infection spread to unless the disease is managed in time?
a. To the subgaleal temporal space
b. To the tympanic cavity
c. To the interpterygoid space
d. To the frontal sinus
*e. To the orbit

101. During complicated labour the symphysis pubis ruptured. What organ can be damaged mostly?
*a. Urinary blader
b. Ovaria
c. Uterus
d. Uterine tubes
e. Rectum

102. A patient with cholelithiasis fell ill with mechanic jaundice. Examination revealed that the stone was in the common bile duct. What bile-excreting ducts make up the obturated duct?
*a. Ductus hepaticus communis et ductus cysticus
b. Ductus hepaticus dexter et ductus cysticus
c. Ductus hepaticus communis et ductus choledochus
d. Ductus hepaticus sinister et ductus cysticus
e. Ductus hepaticus dexter et sinister

103. Neurological examination of a 65 y.o. patient revealed a haemorrhage within the superior temporal gyrus. In the blood supply area of which artery is it?
a. Posterior cerebral artery
b. Anterior cerebral artery
*c. Middle cerebral artery
d. Anterior communicating artery
e. Basilar artery

104. A 70 y.o. man has cut an abscess in the area of mammiform process during shaving. Two days later he was admitted to the hospital with inflammation of arachnoid membranes. How did the infection penetrate into the cavity of skull?
*a. v.emissariaе mastoideaе
b. v.v.tympanicae
c. v.v.auriculares
d. v.facialis
e. v.v.labyrinthi

105. The cerebrospinal fluid is being examined for the purpose of diffrential meningitis diagnostics. At what site is the lumbal puncture safe?
a. L I-L II
b. L II-L III
*c. L III-L IV
d. Th XII-L I
e. L V-S I

106. While preparing a patient to the operation the heart chambers pressure was measured. In one of them the pressure changed during one heart cycle from 0 to 120 mm Hg. What chamber of heart was it?
a. Right ventricle
b. Left atrium
c. -
*d. Left ventricle
e. Right atrium

107. Part of alveoles of a preterm infant didnt spread because of enhanced elastic recoil of lungs. How can this recoil be reduced?
a. By fluid suction from the respiratory tracts
b. By glycose introduction
c. By pure oxygene inhalation
d. By artificial pulmonary ventilation
*e. By surfactant introduction

108. Preventive examination of a patient revealed an enlarged lymph node of metastatic origin on the medial wall of the left axillary crease. Specify the most likely localization of the primary tumour:
a. Submandibular salivary gland
b. Stomach
c. Thyroid gland
*d. Mammary gland
e. Lung

109. A man suffering from osteochondrosis got acute pain in the abdominal muscles (lateral and anterior). During objective examination a physician diagnosticated increased pain sensitivity of skin in the hypogastric region. This pain might be caused by affection of the following nerve:
a. Obturator
b. Sciatic
*c. Iliohypogastric
d. Femoral
e. Genitofemoral

110. A woman suffering from osteochondrosis felt acute pain in her humeral articulation that became stronger when she abducted her shoulder. These symptoms might be caused by damage of the following nerve:
*a. Axillary nerve
b. Dorsal scapular nerve
c. Throracodorsal nerve
d. Subclavicular nerve
e. Subscapular nerve

111. Pyeloureterography X-ray photo showed a renal pelvis with minor calyces only (major calyces were absent). What form of urinary tracts of a kidney was revealed?
a. -
*b. Embryonal
c. Mature
d. Fetal
e. Ampullar

112. A patient has a deep cut wound on the posterior surface of his shoulder in its middle third. What muscle might be injured?
a. Coracobrachial muscle
*b. Triceps muscle of arm
c. Anconeus muscle
d. Biceps muscle of arm
e. Brachial muscle

113. A patient has pain, edema and reddening of his skin in the anterosuperior area of his thigh and his foots thumb. What lymph nodes of his lower extremity responded to the inflammatory process?
a. Superficial longitudinal
b. General longitudinal
c. Deep inguinal
d. Internal longitudinal
*e. Superficial inguinal

114. A patient got a craniocerebral trauma that resulted in right-side convergent strabismus. Damage of which craniocerebral nerve caused such consequences?
a. n.trigeminus
b. n.facialis
*c. n.abducens
d. n.trochlearis
e. n.aculomotorius

115. In case of a penetrating wound of the anterior abdominal wall the wound tract went above the lesser curvature of stomach. What peritoneum formation is most likely to be injured?
a. Ligamentum triangulare sinistrum
*b. Ligamentum hepatogastricum
c. Ligamentum hepatoduoduodenale
d. Ligamentum gastrocolicum
e. Ligamentum hepatorenale

116. After a trauma a patient lost ability of elbow extension. This might have been caused by dysfunction of the following main muscle:
*a. m. triceps brachii
b. m. teres major
c. m. levator scapulae
d. m. infraspinatus
e. m. subscapularis

117. A patient has been diagnosed with a compression fracture of a lumbar vertebra. As a result he has a considerable increase in curvature of the lumbar lordosis. Which ligament damage can induce such changes in the spine curvature?
*a. Anterior longitudinal ligament
b. Yellow ligament
c. Interspinous ligament
d. Iliolumbar ligament
e. Posterior longitudinal ligament

118. After a craniocerebral trauma a patient lost the ability to execute learned purposeful movements (apraxia). The injury is most likely localized in the following region of the cerebral cortex:
a. Gyrus lingualis
b. Gyrus parahippocampalis
c. Gyrus angularis
d. Gyrus paracentralis
*e. Gyrus supramarginalis

119. A patient got an injury of spinal marrow in a road accident that caused loss of tactile sensation, posture sense, vibration sense. What conduction tracts are damaged?
*a. Fascicle of Goll and cuneate fascicle
b. Rubrospinal tract
c. Tectospinal tract
d. Reticulospinal tract
e. Anterior spinocerebellar tract

120. Examination of a patient revealed hypertrophy and inflammation of lymphoid tissue, edema of mucous membrane between palatine arches (acute tonsillitis). What tonsil is normally situated in this area?
a. Tonsilla pharyngealis
b. Tonsilla lingualis
c. -
*d. Tonsilla palatina
e. Tonsilla tubaria

121. While performing an operation in the area of axillary crease a surgeon has to define an arterial vessel surrounded by fascicles of brachial plexus. What artery is it?
a. A.profunda brachii
b. A.subscapularis
c. A.vertebralis
d. A.transversa colli
*e. A.axillaris

122. Examination of a patient with impaired blood coagulation revealed thrombosis of a branch of inferior mesenteric artery. What bowel segment is damaged?
a. Colon ascendens
*b. Colon sigmoideum
c. Caecum
d. Ileum
e. Colon transversum

123. A patient was admitted to the surgical department with inguinal hernia. During the operation the surgeon performs plastic surgery on posterior wall of inguinal canal. What structure forms this wall?
a. Peritoneum
*b. Transverse fascia
c. Inguinal ligament
d. Aponeurosis of abdominal external oblique muscle
e. Loose inferior edge of transverse abdominal muscle

124. A man with an injury of the dorsal area of his neck was admitted to the resuscitation department. What muscle occupies this area?
a. M.rhomboideus minor
b. M.scalenus anterior
c. M.sternocleidomastoideus
d. M.latissimus dorsi
*e. M.trapezius

125. A patient complains of dizziness and hearing loss. What nerve is damaged?
a. Trigeminus
b. Vagus
c. Trochlear
*d. Vestibulocochlear
e. Sublingual

126. While palpating mammary gland of a patient a doctor revealed an induration in form of a node in the inferior medial quadrant. Metastases may extend to the following lymph nodes:
a. Posterior mediastinal
b. Bronchopulmonary
c. Superior diaphragmal
*d. Parasternal
e. Profound lateral cervical

127. A patient got a trauma that caused dysfunction of motor centres regulating activity of head muscles. In what parts of cerebral cortex is the respective centre normally localized?
a. Supramarginal gyrus
b. Superior part of precentral gyrus
*c. Inferior part of precentral gyrus
d. Superior parietal lobule
e. Angular gyrus

128. Examination of a 6-month-old child revealed a delay in closure of the occipital fontanelle. When should it normally close?
*a. Until 3 months
b. Until 6 months
c. Until the end of the second year of life
d. Until the end of the first year of life
e. Before the child is born

129. A patient was diagnosed with paralysis of facial and masticatory muscles. The haematoma is inside the genu of internal capsule. What conduction tract is damaged?
a. Tr. cortico-fronto-pontinus
b. Tr. cortico-temporo-parieto-occipito-pontinus
c. Tr. cortico-spinalis
d. Tr. cortico-thalamicus
*e. Tr. cortico-nuclearis

130. A patient has lost skin sensitivity in the region of the medial surface of his shoulder. This is the result of dysfunction of the following nerve:
a. Radial nerve
b. Medial antebrachial cutaneous nerve
*c. Medial brachial cutaneous nerve
d. Ulnar nerve
e. Axillary nerve

131. A foreign body (a button) closed space of the right superior lobar bronchus. What segments of the right lung wont be supplied with air?
a. Apical and posterior basal
b. Superior and inferior lingular
*c. Apical, posterior, anterior
d. Apical and median basal
e. Medial and lateral

132. A patient was diagnosed with bartholinitis (inflammation of greater vulvovaginal glands). In which organ of urogenital system are these glands localized?
*a. Large lips of pudendum
b. Clitoris
c. Uterus
d. Vagina
e. Small lips of pudendum

133. While performing an inguinal canal operation on account of hernia a surgeon damaged the canals contents. What exactly was damaged?
a. Lig. inguinalе
b. -
c. Urarchus
d. Lig. teres uteri
*e. Funiculus spermaticus

134. Ultrasonic examination of a patient revealed aneurism in the area of aortic arch that caused alteration of vocal function of larynx. What nerve was constricted?
a. Superior laryngeal
b. Diaphragmatic
*c. Recurrent laryngeal
d. Mandibular
e. Sublingual

135. Surgical approach to the thyroid gland from the transverse (collar) approach involves opening of interaponeurotic suprasternal space. What anatomic structure localized in this space is dangerous to be damaged?
a. External jugular vein
b. Inferior thyroid arthery
c. Superior thyroid arthery
*d. Jugular venous arch
e. Subclavicular vein

136. In course of a small pelvis operation it became necessary to ligate an ovarian artery. What formation may be accidentally ligated together with it?
a. Internal iliac vein
b. Urethra
c. Uterine tube
d. Round ligament of uterus
*e. Ureter

137. An injured person was delivered to the hospital with a penetrating wound in the left lateral region of abdomen. What part of the large intestine is most likely damaged?
a. Colon transverses
b. Colon ascendens
*c. Colon descendens
d. Caecum
e. Rectum

138. After a road accident a driver was delivered to the hospital with an injury of the medial epicondyle of humerus. What nerve might be damaged in this case?
a. n. medianus
*b. n. ulnaris
c. n. axillaris
d. n. radialis
e. n. muscolocutaneus

139. A patient with a knife wound in the left lumbal part was delivered to the emergency hospital. In course of operation a surgeon found that internal organs were not damaged but the knife injured one of muscles of renal pelvis. What muscle is it?
a. Abdominal internal oblique muscle
b. Abdominal external oblique muscle
c. Iliac muscle
d. Erector muscle of spine
*e. Greater psoas muscle

140. A 25 year old patient was examined by a medical board. Examination revealed pathology of chest. Transverse dimensions were to small and the sternum was strongly protruding. What chest type is it?
a. Cylindrical chest
b. Barrel chest
c. Funnel chest
d. Flat chest
*e. Keeled chest

141. A man with a stab wound in the area of quadrilateral foramen applied to a doctor. Examination revealed that the patient was unable to draw his arm aside from his body. What nerve is most probably damaged?
*a. N.axillaris
b. N.radialis
c. N.subclavius
d. N.ulnaris
e. N.medianus

142. Brain tomography revealed a tumour in the region of red nucleus. What part of brain isdamaged?
*a. Midbrain
b. Cerebellum
c. Pons cerebelli
d. Interbrain
e. Medulla oblongata

